TOM SAWYER

by Mark Twain

CHAPTER I

"TOM!"

No answer.

"TOM!"

No answer.

"What's gone with that boy,  I wonder? You TOM!"

No answer.

The old lady pulled her spectacles down and looked over them about the
room; then she put them up and looked out under them. She seldom or
never looked THROUGH them for so small a thing as a boy; they were her
state pair, the pride of her heart, and were built for "style," not
service--she could have seen through a pair of stove-lids just as well.
She looked perplexed for a moment, and then said, not fiercely, but
still loud enough for the furniture to hear:

"Well, I lay if I get hold of you I'll--"

She did not finish, for by this time she was bending down and punching
under the bed with the broom, and so she needed breath to punctuate the
punches with. She resurrected nothing but the cat.

"I never did see the beat of that boy!"

She went to the open door and stood in it and looked out among the
tomato vines and "jimpson" weeds that constituted the garden. No Tom.
So she lifted up her voice at an angle calculated for distance and
shouted:

"Y-o-u-u TOM!"

There was a slight noise behind her and she turned just in time to
seize a small boy by the slack of his roundabout and arrest his flight.

"There! I might 'a' thought of that closet. What you been doing in
there?"

"Nothing."

"Nothing! Look at your hands. And look at your mouth. What IS that
truck?"

"I don't know, aunt."

"Well, I know. It's jam--that's what it is. Forty times I've said if
you didn't let that jam alone I'd skin you. Hand me that switch."

The switch hovered in the air--the peril was desperate--

"My! Look behind you, aunt!"

The old lady whirled round, and snatched her skirts out of danger. The
lad fled on the instant, scrambled up the high board-fence, and
disappeared over it.

His aunt Polly stood surprised a moment, and then broke into a gentle
laugh.

"Hang the boy, can't I never learn anything? Ain't he played me tricks
enough like that for me to be looking out for him by this time? But old
fools is the biggest fools there is. Can't learn an old dog new tricks,
as the saying is. But my goodness, he never plays them alike, two days,
and how is a body to know what's coming? He 'pears to know just how
long he can torment me before I get my dander up, and he knows if he
can make out to put me off for a minute or make me laugh, it's all down
again and I can't hit him a lick. I ain't doing my duty by that boy,
and that's the Lord's truth, goodness knows. Spare the rod and spile
the child, as the Good Book says. I'm a laying up sin and suffering for
us both, I know. He's full of the Old Scratch, but laws-a-me! he's my
own dead sister's boy, poor thing, and I ain't got the heart to lash
him, somehow. Every time I let him off, my conscience does hurt me so,
and every time I hit him my old heart most breaks. Well-a-well, man
that is born of woman is of few days and full of trouble, as the
Scripture says, and I reckon it's so. He'll play hookey this evening, *
and [* Southwestern for "afternoon"] I'll just be obleeged to make him
work, to-morrow, to punish him. It's mighty hard to make him work
Saturdays, when all the boys is having holiday, but he hates work more
than he hates anything else, and I've GOT to do some of my duty by him,
or I'll be the ruination of the child."

Tom did play hookey, and he had a very good time. He got back home
barely in season to help Jim, the small colored boy, saw next-day's
wood and split the kindlings before supper--at least he was there in
time to tell his adventures to Jim while Jim did three-fourths of the
work. Tom's younger brother (or rather half-brother) Sid was already
through with his part of the work (picking up chips), for he was a
quiet boy, and had no adventurous, troublesome ways.

While Tom was eating his supper, and stealing sugar as opportunity
offered, Aunt Polly asked him questions that were full of guile, and
very deep--for she wanted to trap him into damaging revealments. Like
many other simple-hearted souls, it was her pet vanity to believe she
was endowed with a talent for dark and mysterious diplomacy, and she
loved to contemplate her most transparent devices as marvels of low
cunning. Said she:

"Tom, it was middling warm in school, warn't it?"

"Yes'm."

"Powerful warm, warn't it?"

"Yes'm."

"Didn't you want to go in a-swimming, Tom?"

A bit of a scare shot through Tom--a touch of uncomfortable suspicion.
He searched Aunt Polly's face, but it told him nothing. So he said:

"No'm--well, not very much."

The old lady reached out her hand and felt Tom's shirt, and said:

"But you ain't too warm now, though." And it flattered her to reflect
that she had discovered that the shirt was dry without anybody knowing
that that was what she had in her mind. But in spite of her, Tom knew
where the wind lay, now. So he forestalled what might be the next move:

"Some of us pumped on our heads--mine's damp yet. See?"

Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had overlooked that bit of
circumstantial evidence, and missed a trick. Then she had a new
inspiration:

"Tom, you didn't have to undo your shirt collar where I sewed it, to
pump on your head, did you? Unbutton your jacket!"

The trouble vanished out of Tom's face. He opened his jacket. His
shirt collar was securely sewed.

"Bother! Well, go 'long with you. I'd made sure you'd played hookey
and been a-swimming. But I forgive ye, Tom. I reckon you're a kind of a
singed cat, as the saying is--better'n you look. THIS time."

She was half sorry her sagacity had miscarried, and half glad that Tom
had stumbled into obedient conduct for once.

But Sidney said:

"Well, now, if I didn't think you sewed his collar with white thread,
but it's black."

"Why, I did sew it with white! Tom!"

But Tom did not wait for the rest. As he went out at the door he said:

"Siddy, I'll lick you for that."

In a safe place Tom examined two large needles which were thrust into
the lapels of his jacket, and had thread bound about them--one needle
carried white thread and the other black. He said:

"She'd never noticed if it hadn't been for Sid. Confound it! sometimes
she sews it with white, and sometimes she sews it with black. I wish to
geeminy she'd stick to one or t'other--I can't keep the run of 'em. But
I bet you I'll lam Sid for that. I'll learn him!"

He was not the Model Boy of the village. He knew the model boy very
well though--and loathed him.

Within two minutes, or even less, he had forgotten all his troubles.
Not because his troubles were one whit less heavy and bitter to him
than a man's are to a man, but because a new and powerful interest bore
them down and drove them out of his mind for the time--just as men's
misfortunes are forgotten in the excitement of new enterprises. This
new interest was a valued novelty in whistling, which he had just
acquired from a negro, and he was suffering to practise it undisturbed.
It consisted in a peculiar bird-like turn, a sort of liquid warble,
produced by touching the tongue to the roof of the mouth at short
intervals in the midst of the music--the reader probably remembers how
to do it, if he has ever been a boy. Diligence and attention soon gave
him the knack of it, and he strode down the street with his mouth full
of harmony and his soul full of gratitude. He felt much as an
astronomer feels who has discovered a new planet--no doubt, as far as
strong, deep, unalloyed pleasure is concerned, the advantage was with
the boy, not the astronomer.

The summer evenings were long. It was not dark, yet. Presently Tom
checked his whistle. A stranger was before him--a boy a shade larger
than himself. A new-comer of any age or either sex was an impressive
curiosity in the poor little shabby village of St. Petersburg. This boy
was well dressed, too--well dressed on a week-day. This was simply
astounding. His cap was a dainty thing, his close-buttoned blue cloth
roundabout was new and natty, and so were his pantaloons. He had shoes
on--and it was only Friday. He even wore a necktie, a bright bit of
ribbon. He had a citified air about him that ate into Tom's vitals. The
more Tom stared at the splendid marvel, the higher he turned up his
nose at his finery and the shabbier and shabbier his own outfit seemed
to him to grow. Neither boy spoke. If one moved, the other moved--but
only sidewise, in a circle; they kept face to face and eye to eye all
the time. Finally Tom said:

"I can lick you!"

"I'd like to see you try it."

"Well, I can do it."

"No you can't, either."

"Yes I can."

"No you can't."

"I can."

"You can't."

"Can!"

"Can't!"

An uncomfortable pause. Then Tom said:

"What's your name?"

"'Tisn't any of your business, maybe."

"Well I 'low I'll MAKE it my business."

"Well why don't you?"

"If you say much, I will."

"Much--much--MUCH. There now."

"Oh, you think you're mighty smart, DON'T you? I could lick you with
one hand tied behind me, if I wanted to."

"Well why don't you DO it? You SAY you can do it."

"Well I WILL, if you fool with me."

"Oh yes--I've seen whole families in the same fix."

"Smarty! You think you're SOME, now, DON'T you? Oh, what a hat!"

"You can lump that hat if you don't like it. I dare you to knock it
off--and anybody that'll take a dare will suck eggs."

"You're a liar!"

"You're another."

"You're a fighting liar and dasn't take it up."

"Aw--take a walk!"

"Say--if you give me much more of your sass I'll take and bounce a
rock off'n your head."

"Oh, of COURSE you will."

"Well I WILL."

"Well why don't you DO it then? What do you keep SAYING you will for?
Why don't you DO it? It's because you're afraid."

"I AIN'T afraid."

"You are."

"I ain't."

"You are."

Another pause, and more eying and sidling around each other. Presently
they were shoulder to shoulder. Tom said:

"Get away from here!"

"Go away yourself!"

"I won't."

"I won't either."

So they stood, each with a foot placed at an angle as a brace, and
both shoving with might and main, and glowering at each other with
hate. But neither could get an advantage. After struggling till both
were hot and flushed, each relaxed his strain with watchful caution,
and Tom said:

"You're a coward and a pup. I'll tell my big brother on you, and he
can thrash you with his little finger, and I'll make him do it, too."

"What do I care for your big brother? I've got a brother that's bigger
than he is--and what's more, he can throw him over that fence, too."
[Both brothers were imaginary.]

"That's a lie."

"YOUR saying so don't make it so."

Tom drew a line in the dust with his big toe, and said:

"I dare you to step over that, and I'll lick you till you can't stand
up. Anybody that'll take a dare will steal sheep."

The new boy stepped over promptly, and said:

"Now you said you'd do it, now let's see you do it."

"Don't you crowd me now; you better look out."

"Well, you SAID you'd do it--why don't you do it?"

"By jingo! for two cents I WILL do it."

The new boy took two broad coppers out of his pocket and held them out
with derision. Tom struck them to the ground. In an instant both boys
were rolling and tumbling in the dirt, gripped together like cats; and
for the space of a minute they tugged and tore at each other's hair and
clothes, punched and scratched each other's nose, and covered
themselves with dust and glory. Presently the confusion took form, and
through the fog of battle Tom appeared, seated astride the new boy, and
pounding him with his fists. "Holler 'nuff!" said he.

The boy only struggled to free himself. He was crying--mainly from rage.

"Holler 'nuff!"--and the pounding went on.

At last the stranger got out a smothered "'Nuff!" and Tom let him up
and said:

"Now that'll learn you. Better look out who you're fooling with next
time."

The new boy went off brushing the dust from his clothes, sobbing,
snuffling, and occasionally looking back and shaking his head and
threatening what he would do to Tom the "next time he caught him out."
To which Tom responded with jeers, and started off in high feather, and
as soon as his back was turned the new boy snatched up a stone, threw
it and hit him between the shoulders and then turned tail and ran like
an antelope. Tom chased the traitor home, and thus found out where he
lived. He then held a position at the gate for some time, daring the
enemy to come outside, but the enemy only made faces at him through the
window and declined. At last the enemy's mother appeared, and called
Tom a bad, vicious, vulgar child, and ordered him away. So he went
away; but he said he "'lowed" to "lay" for that boy.

He got home pretty late that night, and when he climbed cautiously in
at the window, he uncovered an ambuscade, in the person of his aunt;
and when she saw the state his clothes were in her resolution to turn
his Saturday holiday into captivity at hard labor became adamantine in
its firmness.

CHAPTER II

SATURDAY morning was come, and all the summer world was bright and
fresh, and brimming with life. There was a song in every heart; and if
the heart was young the music issued at the lips. There was cheer in
every face and a spring in every step. The locust-trees were in bloom
and the fragrance of the blossoms filled the air. Cardiff Hill, beyond
the village and above it, was green with vegetation and it lay just far
enough away to seem a Delectable Land, dreamy, reposeful, and inviting.

Tom appeared on the sidewalk with a bucket of whitewash and a
long-handled brush. He surveyed the fence, and all gladness left him and
a deep melancholy settled down upon his spirit. Thirty yards of board
fence nine feet high. Life to him seemed hollow, and existence but a
burden. Sighing, he dipped his brush and passed it along the topmost
plank; repeated the operation; did it again; compared the insignificant
whitewashed streak with the far-reaching continent of unwhitewashed
fence, and sat down on a tree-box discouraged. Jim came skipping out at
the gate with a tin pail, and singing Buffalo Gals. Bringing water from
the town pump had always been hateful work in Tom's eyes, before, but
now it did not strike him so. He remembered that there was company at
the pump. White, mulatto, and negro boys and girls were always there
waiting their turns, resting, trading playthings, quarrelling,
fighting, skylarking. And he remembered that although the pump was only
a hundred and fifty yards off, Jim never got back with a bucket of
water under an hour--and even then somebody generally had to go after
him. Tom said:

"Say, Jim, I'll fetch the water if you'll whitewash some."

Jim shook his head and said:

"Can't, Mars Tom. Ole missis, she tole me I got to go an' git dis
water an' not stop foolin' roun' wid anybody. She say she spec' Mars
Tom gwine to ax me to whitewash, an' so she tole me go 'long an' 'tend
to my own business--she 'lowed SHE'D 'tend to de whitewashin'."

"Oh, never you mind what she said, Jim. That's the way she always
talks. Gimme the bucket--I won't be gone only a a minute. SHE won't
ever know."

"Oh, I dasn't, Mars Tom. Ole missis she'd take an' tar de head off'n
me. 'Deed she would."

"SHE! She never licks anybody--whacks 'em over the head with her
thimble--and who cares for that, I'd like to know. She talks awful, but
talk don't hurt--anyways it don't if she don't cry. Jim, I'll give you
a marvel. I'll give you a white alley!"

Jim began to waver.

"White alley, Jim! And it's a bully taw."

"My! Dat's a mighty gay marvel, I tell you! But Mars Tom I's powerful
'fraid ole missis--"

"And besides, if you will I'll show you my sore toe."

Jim was only human--this attraction was too much for him. He put down
his pail, took the white alley, and bent over the toe with absorbing
interest while the bandage was being unwound. In another moment he was
flying down the street with his pail and a tingling rear, Tom was
whitewashing with vigor, and Aunt Polly was retiring from the field
with a slipper in her hand and triumph in her eye.

But Tom's energy did not last. He began to think of the fun he had
planned for this day, and his sorrows multiplied. Soon the free boys
would come tripping along on all sorts of delicious expeditions, and
they would make a world of fun of him for having to work--the very
thought of it burnt him like fire. He got out his worldly wealth and
examined it--bits of toys, marbles, and trash; enough to buy an
exchange of WORK, maybe, but not half enough to buy so much as half an
hour of pure freedom. So he returned his straitened means to his
pocket, and gave up the idea of trying to buy the boys. At this dark
and hopeless moment an inspiration burst upon him! Nothing less than a
great, magnificent inspiration.

He took up his brush and went tranquilly to work. Ben Rogers hove in
sight presently--the very boy, of all boys, whose ridicule he had been
dreading. Ben's gait was the hop-skip-and-jump--proof enough that his
heart was light and his anticipations high. He was eating an apple, and
giving a long, melodious whoop, at intervals, followed by a deep-toned
ding-dong-dong, ding-dong-dong, for he was personating a steamboat. As
he drew near, he slackened speed, took the middle of the street, leaned
far over to starboard and rounded to ponderously and with laborious
pomp and circumstance--for he was personating the Big Missouri, and
considered himself to be drawing nine feet of water. He was boat and
captain and engine-bells combined, so he had to imagine himself
standing on his own hurricane-deck giving the orders and executing them:

"Stop her, sir! Ting-a-ling-ling!" The headway ran almost out, and he
drew up slowly toward the sidewalk.

"Ship up to back! Ting-a-ling-ling!" His arms straightened and
stiffened down his sides.

"Set her back on the stabboard! Ting-a-ling-ling! Chow! ch-chow-wow!
Chow!" His right hand, meantime, describing stately circles--for it was
representing a forty-foot wheel.

"Let her go back on the labboard! Ting-a-lingling! Chow-ch-chow-chow!"
The left hand began to describe circles.

"Stop the stabboard! Ting-a-ling-ling! Stop the labboard! Come ahead
on the stabboard! Stop her! Let your outside turn over slow!
Ting-a-ling-ling! Chow-ow-ow! Get out that head-line! LIVELY now!
Come--out with your spring-line--what're you about there! Take a turn
round that stump with the bight of it! Stand by that stage, now--let her
go! Done with the engines, sir! Ting-a-ling-ling! SH'T! S'H'T! SH'T!"
(trying the gauge-cocks).

Tom went on whitewashing--paid no attention to the steamboat. Ben
stared a moment and then said: "Hi-YI! YOU'RE up a stump, ain't you!"

No answer. Tom surveyed his last touch with the eye of an artist, then
he gave his brush another gentle sweep and surveyed the result, as
before. Ben ranged up alongside of him. Tom's mouth watered for the
apple, but he stuck to his work. Ben said:

"Hello, old chap, you got to work, hey?"

Tom wheeled suddenly and said:

"Why, it's you, Ben! I warn't noticing."

"Say--I'm going in a-swimming, I am. Don't you wish you could? But of
course you'd druther WORK--wouldn't you? Course you would!"

Tom contemplated the boy a bit, and said:

"What do you call work?"

"Why, ain't THAT work?"

Tom resumed his whitewashing, and answered carelessly:

"Well, maybe it is, and maybe it ain't. All I know, is, it suits Tom
Sawyer."

"Oh come, now, you don't mean to let on that you LIKE it?"

The brush continued to move.

"Like it? Well, I don't see why I oughtn't to like it. Does a boy get
a chance to whitewash a fence every day?"

That put the thing in a new light. Ben stopped nibbling his apple. Tom
swept his brush daintily back and forth--stepped back to note the
effect--added a touch here and there--criticised the effect again--Ben
watching every move and getting more and more interested, more and more
absorbed. Presently he said:

"Say, Tom, let ME whitewash a little."

Tom considered, was about to consent; but he altered his mind:

"No--no--I reckon it wouldn't hardly do, Ben. You see, Aunt Polly's
awful particular about this fence--right here on the street, you know
--but if it was the back fence I wouldn't mind and SHE wouldn't. Yes,
she's awful particular about this fence; it's got to be done very
careful; I reckon there ain't one boy in a thousand, maybe two
thousand, that can do it the way it's got to be done."

"No--is that so? Oh come, now--lemme just try. Only just a little--I'd
let YOU, if you was me, Tom."

"Ben, I'd like to, honest injun; but Aunt Polly--well, Jim wanted to
do it, but she wouldn't let him; Sid wanted to do it, and she wouldn't
let Sid. Now don't you see how I'm fixed? If you was to tackle this
fence and anything was to happen to it--"

"Oh, shucks, I'll be just as careful. Now lemme try. Say--I'll give
you the core of my apple."

"Well, here--No, Ben, now don't. I'm afeard--"

"I'll give you ALL of it!"

Tom gave up the brush with reluctance in his face, but alacrity in his
heart. And while the late steamer Big Missouri worked and sweated in
the sun, the retired artist sat on a barrel in the shade close by,
dangled his legs, munched his apple, and planned the slaughter of more
innocents. There was no lack of material; boys happened along every
little while; they came to jeer, but remained to whitewash. By the time
Ben was fagged out, Tom had traded the next chance to Billy Fisher for
a kite, in good repair; and when he played out, Johnny Miller bought in
for a dead rat and a string to swing it with--and so on, and so on,
hour after hour. And when the middle of the afternoon came, from being
a poor poverty-stricken boy in the morning, Tom was literally rolling
in wealth. He had besides the things before mentioned, twelve marbles,
part of a jews-harp, a piece of blue bottle-glass to look through, a
spool cannon, a key that wouldn't unlock anything, a fragment of chalk,
a glass stopper of a decanter, a tin soldier, a couple of tadpoles, six
fire-crackers, a kitten with only one eye, a brass doorknob, a
dog-collar--but no dog--the handle of a knife, four pieces of
orange-peel, and a dilapidated old window sash.

He had had a nice, good, idle time all the while--plenty of company
--and the fence had three coats of whitewash on it! If he hadn't run out
of whitewash he would have bankrupted every boy in the village.

Tom said to himself that it was not such a hollow world, after all. He
had discovered a great law of human action, without knowing it--namely,
that in order to make a man or a boy covet a thing, it is only
necessary to make the thing difficult to attain. If he had been a great
and wise philosopher, like the writer of this book, he would now have
comprehended that Work consists of whatever a body is OBLIGED to do,
and that Play consists of whatever a body is not obliged to do. And
this would help him to understand why constructing artificial flowers
or performing on a tread-mill is work, while rolling ten-pins or
climbing Mont Blanc is only amusement. There are wealthy gentlemen in
England who drive four-horse passenger-coaches twenty or thirty miles
on a daily line, in the summer, because the privilege costs them
considerable money; but if they were offered wages for the service,
that would turn it into work and then they would resign.

The boy mused awhile over the substantial change which had taken place
in his worldly circumstances, and then wended toward headquarters to
report.

CHAPTER III

TOM presented himself before Aunt Polly, who was sitting by an open
window in a pleasant rearward apartment, which was bedroom,
breakfast-room, dining-room, and library, combined. The balmy summer
air, the restful quiet, the odor of the flowers, and the drowsing murmur
of the bees had had their effect, and she was nodding over her knitting
--for she had no company but the cat, and it was asleep in her lap. Her
spectacles were propped up on her gray head for safety. She had thought
that of course Tom had deserted long ago, and she wondered at seeing him
place himself in her power again in this intrepid way. He said: "Mayn't
I go and play now, aunt?"

"What, a'ready? How much have you done?"

"It's all done, aunt."

"Tom, don't lie to me--I can't bear it."

"I ain't, aunt; it IS all done."

Aunt Polly placed small trust in such evidence. She went out to see
for herself; and she would have been content to find twenty per cent.
of Tom's statement true. When she found the entire fence whitewashed,
and not only whitewashed but elaborately coated and recoated, and even
a streak added to the ground, her astonishment was almost unspeakable.
She said:

"Well, I never! There's no getting round it, you can work when you're
a mind to, Tom." And then she diluted the compliment by adding, "But
it's powerful seldom you're a mind to, I'm bound to say. Well, go 'long
and play; but mind you get back some time in a week, or I'll tan you."

She was so overcome by the splendor of his achievement that she took
him into the closet and selected a choice apple and delivered it to
him, along with an improving lecture upon the added value and flavor a
treat took to itself when it came without sin through virtuous effort.
And while she closed with a happy Scriptural flourish, he "hooked" a
doughnut.

Then he skipped out, and saw Sid just starting up the outside stairway
that led to the back rooms on the second floor. Clods were handy and
the air was full of them in a twinkling. They raged around Sid like a
hail-storm; and before Aunt Polly could collect her surprised faculties
and sally to the rescue, six or seven clods had taken personal effect,
and Tom was over the fence and gone. There was a gate, but as a general
thing he was too crowded for time to make use of it. His soul was at
peace, now that he had settled with Sid for calling attention to his
black thread and getting him into trouble.

Tom skirted the block, and came round into a muddy alley that led by
the back of his aunt's cow-stable. He presently got safely beyond the
reach of capture and punishment, and hastened toward the public square
of the village, where two "military" companies of boys had met for
conflict, according to previous appointment. Tom was General of one of
these armies, Joe Harper (a bosom friend) General of the other. These
two great commanders did not condescend to fight in person--that being
better suited to the still smaller fry--but sat together on an eminence
and conducted the field operations by orders delivered through
aides-de-camp. Tom's army won a great victory, after a long and
hard-fought battle. Then the dead were counted, prisoners exchanged,
the terms of the next disagreement agreed upon, and the day for the
necessary battle appointed; after which the armies fell into line and
marched away, and Tom turned homeward alone.

As he was passing by the house where Jeff Thatcher lived, he saw a new
girl in the garden--a lovely little blue-eyed creature with yellow hair
plaited into two long-tails, white summer frock and embroidered
pantalettes. The fresh-crowned hero fell without firing a shot. A
certain Amy Lawrence vanished out of his heart and left not even a
memory of herself behind. He had thought he loved her to distraction;
he had regarded his passion as adoration; and behold it was only a poor
little evanescent partiality. He had been months winning her; she had
confessed hardly a week ago; he had been the happiest and the proudest
boy in the world only seven short days, and here in one instant of time
she had gone out of his heart like a casual stranger whose visit is
done.

He worshipped this new angel with furtive eye, till he saw that she
had discovered him; then he pretended he did not know she was present,
and began to "show off" in all sorts of absurd boyish ways, in order to
win her admiration. He kept up this grotesque foolishness for some
time; but by-and-by, while he was in the midst of some dangerous
gymnastic performances, he glanced aside and saw that the little girl
was wending her way toward the house. Tom came up to the fence and
leaned on it, grieving, and hoping she would tarry yet awhile longer.
She halted a moment on the steps and then moved toward the door. Tom
heaved a great sigh as she put her foot on the threshold. But his face
lit up, right away, for she tossed a pansy over the fence a moment
before she disappeared.

The boy ran around and stopped within a foot or two of the flower, and
then shaded his eyes with his hand and began to look down street as if
he had discovered something of interest going on in that direction.
Presently he picked up a straw and began trying to balance it on his
nose, with his head tilted far back; and as he moved from side to side,
in his efforts, he edged nearer and nearer toward the pansy; finally
his bare foot rested upon it, his pliant toes closed upon it, and he
hopped away with the treasure and disappeared round the corner. But
only for a minute--only while he could button the flower inside his
jacket, next his heart--or next his stomach, possibly, for he was not
much posted in anatomy, and not hypercritical, anyway.

He returned, now, and hung about the fence till nightfall, "showing
off," as before; but the girl never exhibited herself again, though Tom
comforted himself a little with the hope that she had been near some
window, meantime, and been aware of his attentions. Finally he strode
home reluctantly, with his poor head full of visions.

All through supper his spirits were so high that his aunt wondered
"what had got into the child." He took a good scolding about clodding
Sid, and did not seem to mind it in the least. He tried to steal sugar
under his aunt's very nose, and got his knuckles rapped for it. He said:

"Aunt, you don't whack Sid when he takes it."

"Well, Sid don't torment a body the way you do. You'd be always into
that sugar if I warn't watching you."

Presently she stepped into the kitchen, and Sid, happy in his
immunity, reached for the sugar-bowl--a sort of glorying over Tom which
was wellnigh unbearable. But Sid's fingers slipped and the bowl dropped
and broke. Tom was in ecstasies. In such ecstasies that he even
controlled his tongue and was silent. He said to himself that he would
not speak a word, even when his aunt came in, but would sit perfectly
still till she asked who did the mischief; and then he would tell, and
there would be nothing so good in the world as to see that pet model
"catch it." He was so brimful of exultation that he could hardly hold
himself when the old lady came back and stood above the wreck
discharging lightnings of wrath from over her spectacles. He said to
himself, "Now it's coming!" And the next instant he was sprawling on
the floor! The potent palm was uplifted to strike again when Tom cried
out:

"Hold on, now, what 'er you belting ME for?--Sid broke it!"

Aunt Polly paused, perplexed, and Tom looked for healing pity. But
when she got her tongue again, she only said:

"Umf! Well, you didn't get a lick amiss, I reckon. You been into some
other audacious mischief when I wasn't around, like enough."

Then her conscience reproached her, and she yearned to say something
kind and loving; but she judged that this would be construed into a
confession that she had been in the wrong, and discipline forbade that.
So she kept silence, and went about her affairs with a troubled heart.
Tom sulked in a corner and exalted his woes. He knew that in her heart
his aunt was on her knees to him, and he was morosely gratified by the
consciousness of it. He would hang out no signals, he would take notice
of none. He knew that a yearning glance fell upon him, now and then,
through a film of tears, but he refused recognition of it. He pictured
himself lying sick unto death and his aunt bending over him beseeching
one little forgiving word, but he would turn his face to the wall, and
die with that word unsaid. Ah, how would she feel then? And he pictured
himself brought home from the river, dead, with his curls all wet, and
his sore heart at rest. How she would throw herself upon him, and how
her tears would fall like rain, and her lips pray God to give her back
her boy and she would never, never abuse him any more! But he would lie
there cold and white and make no sign--a poor little sufferer, whose
griefs were at an end. He so worked upon his feelings with the pathos
of these dreams, that he had to keep swallowing, he was so like to
choke; and his eyes swam in a blur of water, which overflowed when he
winked, and ran down and trickled from the end of his nose. And such a
luxury to him was this petting of his sorrows, that he could not bear
to have any worldly cheeriness or any grating delight intrude upon it;
it was too sacred for such contact; and so, presently, when his cousin
Mary danced in, all alive with the joy of seeing home again after an
age-long visit of one week to the country, he got up and moved in
clouds and darkness out at one door as she brought song and sunshine in
at the other.

He wandered far from the accustomed haunts of boys, and sought
desolate places that were in harmony with his spirit. A log raft in the
river invited him, and he seated himself on its outer edge and
contemplated the dreary vastness of the stream, wishing, the while,
that he could only be drowned, all at once and unconsciously, without
undergoing the uncomfortable routine devised by nature. Then he thought
of his flower. He got it out, rumpled and wilted, and it mightily
increased his dismal felicity. He wondered if she would pity him if she
knew? Would she cry, and wish that she had a right to put her arms
around his neck and comfort him? Or would she turn coldly away like all
the hollow world? This picture brought such an agony of pleasurable
suffering that he worked it over and over again in his mind and set it
up in new and varied lights, till he wore it threadbare. At last he
rose up sighing and departed in the darkness.

About half-past nine or ten o'clock he came along the deserted street
to where the Adored Unknown lived; he paused a moment; no sound fell
upon his listening ear; a candle was casting a dull glow upon the
curtain of a second-story window. Was the sacred presence there? He
climbed the fence, threaded his stealthy way through the plants, till
he stood under that window; he looked up at it long, and with emotion;
then he laid him down on the ground under it, disposing himself upon
his back, with his hands clasped upon his breast and holding his poor
wilted flower. And thus he would die--out in the cold world, with no
shelter over his homeless head, no friendly hand to wipe the
death-damps from his brow, no loving face to bend pityingly over him
when the great agony came. And thus SHE would see him when she looked
out upon the glad morning, and oh! would she drop one little tear upon
his poor, lifeless form, would she heave one little sigh to see a bright
young life so rudely blighted, so untimely cut down?

The window went up, a maid-servant's discordant voice profaned the
holy calm, and a deluge of water drenched the prone martyr's remains!

The strangling hero sprang up with a relieving snort. There was a whiz
as of a missile in the air, mingled with the murmur of a curse, a sound
as of shivering glass followed, and a small, vague form went over the
fence and shot away in the gloom.

Not long after, as Tom, all undressed for bed, was surveying his
drenched garments by the light of a tallow dip, Sid woke up; but if he
had any dim idea of making any "references to allusions," he thought
better of it and held his peace, for there was danger in Tom's eye.

Tom turned in without the added vexation of prayers, and Sid made
mental note of the omission.

CHAPTER IV

THE sun rose upon a tranquil world, and beamed down upon the peaceful
village like a benediction. Breakfast over, Aunt Polly had family
worship: it began with a prayer built from the ground up of solid
courses of Scriptural quotations, welded together with a thin mortar of
originality; and from the summit of this she delivered a grim chapter
of the Mosaic Law, as from Sinai.

Then Tom girded up his loins, so to speak, and went to work to "get
his verses." Sid had learned his lesson days before. Tom bent all his
energies to the memorizing of five verses, and he chose part of the
Sermon on the Mount, because he could find no verses that were shorter.
At the end of half an hour Tom had a vague general idea of his lesson,
but no more, for his mind was traversing the whole field of human
thought, and his hands were busy with distracting recreations. Mary
took his book to hear him recite, and he tried to find his way through
the fog:

"Blessed are the--a--a--"

"Poor"--

"Yes--poor; blessed are the poor--a--a--"

"In spirit--"

"In spirit; blessed are the poor in spirit, for they--they--"

"THEIRS--"

"For THEIRS. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn, for they--they--"

"Sh--"

"For they--a--"

"S, H, A--"

"For they S, H--Oh, I don't know what it is!"

"SHALL!"

"Oh, SHALL! for they shall--for they shall--a--a--shall mourn--a--a--
blessed are they that shall--they that--a--they that shall mourn, for
they shall--a--shall WHAT? Why don't you tell me, Mary?--what do you
want to be so mean for?"

"Oh, Tom, you poor thick-headed thing, I'm not teasing you. I wouldn't
do that. You must go and learn it again. Don't you be discouraged, Tom,
you'll manage it--and if you do, I'll give you something ever so nice.
There, now, that's a good boy."

"All right! What is it, Mary, tell me what it is."

"Never you mind, Tom. You know if I say it's nice, it is nice."

"You bet you that's so, Mary. All right, I'll tackle it again."

And he did "tackle it again"--and under the double pressure of
curiosity and prospective gain he did it with such spirit that he
accomplished a shining success. Mary gave him a brand-new "Barlow"
knife worth twelve and a half cents; and the convulsion of delight that
swept his system shook him to his foundations. True, the knife would
not cut anything, but it was a "sure-enough" Barlow, and there was
inconceivable grandeur in that--though where the Western boys ever got
the idea that such a weapon could possibly be counterfeited to its
injury is an imposing mystery and will always remain so, perhaps. Tom
contrived to scarify the cupboard with it, and was arranging to begin
on the bureau, when he was called off to dress for Sunday-school.

Mary gave him a tin basin of water and a piece of soap, and he went
outside the door and set the basin on a little bench there; then he
dipped the soap in the water and laid it down; turned up his sleeves;
poured out the water on the ground, gently, and then entered the
kitchen and began to wipe his face diligently on the towel behind the
door. But Mary removed the towel and said:

"Now ain't you ashamed, Tom. You mustn't be so bad. Water won't hurt
you."

Tom was a trifle disconcerted. The basin was refilled, and this time
he stood over it a little while, gathering resolution; took in a big
breath and began. When he entered the kitchen presently, with both eyes
shut and groping for the towel with his hands, an honorable testimony
of suds and water was dripping from his face. But when he emerged from
the towel, he was not yet satisfactory, for the clean territory stopped
short at his chin and his jaws, like a mask; below and beyond this line
there was a dark expanse of unirrigated soil that spread downward in
front and backward around his neck. Mary took him in hand, and when she
was done with him he was a man and a brother, without distinction of
color, and his saturated hair was neatly brushed, and its short curls
wrought into a dainty and symmetrical general effect. [He privately
smoothed out the curls, with labor and difficulty, and plastered his
hair close down to his head; for he held curls to be effeminate, and
his own filled his life with bitterness.] Then Mary got out a suit of
his clothing that had been used only on Sundays during two years--they
were simply called his "other clothes"--and so by that we know the
size of his wardrobe. The girl "put him to rights" after he had dressed
himself; she buttoned his neat roundabout up to his chin, turned his
vast shirt collar down over his shoulders, brushed him off and crowned
him with his speckled straw hat. He now looked exceedingly improved and
uncomfortable. He was fully as uncomfortable as he looked; for there
was a restraint about whole clothes and cleanliness that galled him. He
hoped that Mary would forget his shoes, but the hope was blighted; she
coated them thoroughly with tallow, as was the custom, and brought them
out. He lost his temper and said he was always being made to do
everything he didn't want to do. But Mary said, persuasively:

"Please, Tom--that's a good boy."

So he got into the shoes snarling. Mary was soon ready, and the three
children set out for Sunday-school--a place that Tom hated with his
whole heart; but Sid and Mary were fond of it.

Sabbath-school hours were from nine to half-past ten; and then church
service. Two of the children always remained for the sermon
voluntarily, and the other always remained too--for stronger reasons.
The church's high-backed, uncushioned pews would seat about three
hundred persons; the edifice was but a small, plain affair, with a sort
of pine board tree-box on top of it for a steeple. At the door Tom
dropped back a step and accosted a Sunday-dressed comrade:

"Say, Billy, got a yaller ticket?"

"Yes."

"What'll you take for her?"

"What'll you give?"

"Piece of lickrish and a fish-hook."

"Less see 'em."

Tom exhibited. They were satisfactory, and the property changed hands.
Then Tom traded a couple of white alleys for three red tickets, and
some small trifle or other for a couple of blue ones. He waylaid other
boys as they came, and went on buying tickets of various colors ten or
fifteen minutes longer. He entered the church, now, with a swarm of
clean and noisy boys and girls, proceeded to his seat and started a
quarrel with the first boy that came handy. The teacher, a grave,
elderly man, interfered; then turned his back a moment and Tom pulled a
boy's hair in the next bench, and was absorbed in his book when the boy
turned around; stuck a pin in another boy, presently, in order to hear
him say "Ouch!" and got a new reprimand from his teacher. Tom's whole
class were of a pattern--restless, noisy, and troublesome. When they
came to recite their lessons, not one of them knew his verses
perfectly, but had to be prompted all along. However, they worried
through, and each got his reward--in small blue tickets, each with a
passage of Scripture on it; each blue ticket was pay for two verses of
the recitation. Ten blue tickets equalled a red one, and could be
exchanged for it; ten red tickets equalled a yellow one; for ten yellow
tickets the superintendent gave a very plainly bound Bible (worth forty
cents in those easy times) to the pupil. How many of my readers would
have the industry and application to memorize two thousand verses, even
for a Dore Bible? And yet Mary had acquired two Bibles in this way--it
was the patient work of two years--and a boy of German parentage had
won four or five. He once recited three thousand verses without
stopping; but the strain upon his mental faculties was too great, and
he was little better than an idiot from that day forth--a grievous
misfortune for the school, for on great occasions, before company, the
superintendent (as Tom expressed it) had always made this boy come out
and "spread himself." Only the older pupils managed to keep their
tickets and stick to their tedious work long enough to get a Bible, and
so the delivery of one of these prizes was a rare and noteworthy
circumstance; the successful pupil was so great and conspicuous for
that day that on the spot every scholar's heart was fired with a fresh
ambition that often lasted a couple of weeks. It is possible that Tom's
mental stomach had never really hungered for one of those prizes, but
unquestionably his entire being had for many a day longed for the glory
and the eclat that came with it.

In due course the superintendent stood up in front of the pulpit, with
a closed hymn-book in his hand and his forefinger inserted between its
leaves, and commanded attention. When a Sunday-school superintendent
makes his customary little speech, a hymn-book in the hand is as
necessary as is the inevitable sheet of music in the hand of a singer
who stands forward on the platform and sings a solo at a concert
--though why, is a mystery: for neither the hymn-book nor the sheet of
music is ever referred to by the sufferer. This superintendent was a
slim creature of thirty-five, with a sandy goatee and short sandy hair;
he wore a stiff standing-collar whose upper edge almost reached his
ears and whose sharp points curved forward abreast the corners of his
mouth--a fence that compelled a straight lookout ahead, and a turning
of the whole body when a side view was required; his chin was propped
on a spreading cravat which was as broad and as long as a bank-note,
and had fringed ends; his boot toes were turned sharply up, in the
fashion of the day, like sleigh-runners--an effect patiently and
laboriously produced by the young men by sitting with their toes
pressed against a wall for hours together. Mr. Walters was very earnest
of mien, and very sincere and honest at heart; and he held sacred
things and places in such reverence, and so separated them from worldly
matters, that unconsciously to himself his Sunday-school voice had
acquired a peculiar intonation which was wholly absent on week-days. He
began after this fashion:

"Now, children, I want you all to sit up just as straight and pretty
as you can and give me all your attention for a minute or two. There
--that is it. That is the way good little boys and girls should do. I see
one little girl who is looking out of the window--I am afraid she
thinks I am out there somewhere--perhaps up in one of the trees making
a speech to the little birds. [Applausive titter.] I want to tell you
how good it makes me feel to see so many bright, clean little faces
assembled in a place like this, learning to do right and be good." And
so forth and so on. It is not necessary to set down the rest of the
oration. It was of a pattern which does not vary, and so it is familiar
to us all.

The latter third of the speech was marred by the resumption of fights
and other recreations among certain of the bad boys, and by fidgetings
and whisperings that extended far and wide, washing even to the bases
of isolated and incorruptible rocks like Sid and Mary. But now every
sound ceased suddenly, with the subsidence of Mr. Walters' voice, and
the conclusion of the speech was received with a burst of silent
gratitude.

A good part of the whispering had been occasioned by an event which
was more or less rare--the entrance of visitors: lawyer Thatcher,
accompanied by a very feeble and aged man; a fine, portly, middle-aged
gentleman with iron-gray hair; and a dignified lady who was doubtless
the latter's wife. The lady was leading a child. Tom had been restless
and full of chafings and repinings; conscience-smitten, too--he could
not meet Amy Lawrence's eye, he could not brook her loving gaze. But
when he saw this small new-comer his soul was all ablaze with bliss in
a moment. The next moment he was "showing off" with all his might
--cuffing boys, pulling hair, making faces--in a word, using every art
that seemed likely to fascinate a girl and win her applause. His
exaltation had but one alloy--the memory of his humiliation in this
angel's garden--and that record in sand was fast washing out, under
the waves of happiness that were sweeping over it now.

The visitors were given the highest seat of honor, and as soon as Mr.
Walters' speech was finished, he introduced them to the school. The
middle-aged man turned out to be a prodigious personage--no less a one
than the county judge--altogether the most august creation these
children had ever looked upon--and they wondered what kind of material
he was made of--and they half wanted to hear him roar, and were half
afraid he might, too. He was from Constantinople, twelve miles away--so
he had travelled, and seen the world--these very eyes had looked upon
the county court-house--which was said to have a tin roof. The awe
which these reflections inspired was attested by the impressive silence
and the ranks of staring eyes. This was the great Judge Thatcher,
brother of their own lawyer. Jeff Thatcher immediately went forward, to
be familiar with the great man and be envied by the school. It would
have been music to his soul to hear the whisperings:

"Look at him, Jim! He's a going up there. Say--look! he's a going to
shake hands with him--he IS shaking hands with him! By jings, don't you
wish you was Jeff?"

Mr. Walters fell to "showing off," with all sorts of official
bustlings and activities, giving orders, delivering judgments,
discharging directions here, there, everywhere that he could find a
target. The librarian "showed off"--running hither and thither with his
arms full of books and making a deal of the splutter and fuss that
insect authority delights in. The young lady teachers "showed off"
--bending sweetly over pupils that were lately being boxed, lifting
pretty warning fingers at bad little boys and patting good ones
lovingly. The young gentlemen teachers "showed off" with small
scoldings and other little displays of authority and fine attention to
discipline--and most of the teachers, of both sexes, found business up
at the library, by the pulpit; and it was business that frequently had
to be done over again two or three times (with much seeming vexation).
The little girls "showed off" in various ways, and the little boys
"showed off" with such diligence that the air was thick with paper wads
and the murmur of scufflings. And above it all the great man sat and
beamed a majestic judicial smile upon all the house, and warmed himself
in the sun of his own grandeur--for he was "showing off," too.

There was only one thing wanting to make Mr. Walters' ecstasy
complete, and that was a chance to deliver a Bible-prize and exhibit a
prodigy. Several pupils had a few yellow tickets, but none had enough
--he had been around among the star pupils inquiring. He would have given
worlds, now, to have that German lad back again with a sound mind.

And now at this moment, when hope was dead, Tom Sawyer came forward
with nine yellow tickets, nine red tickets, and ten blue ones, and
demanded a Bible. This was a thunderbolt out of a clear sky. Walters
was not expecting an application from this source for the next ten
years. But there was no getting around it--here were the certified
checks, and they were good for their face. Tom was therefore elevated
to a place with the Judge and the other elect, and the great news was
announced from headquarters. It was the most stunning surprise of the
decade, and so profound was the sensation that it lifted the new hero
up to the judicial one's altitude, and the school had two marvels to
gaze upon in place of one. The boys were all eaten up with envy--but
those that suffered the bitterest pangs were those who perceived too
late that they themselves had contributed to this hated splendor by
trading tickets to Tom for the wealth he had amassed in selling
whitewashing privileges. These despised themselves, as being the dupes
of a wily fraud, a guileful snake in the grass.

The prize was delivered to Tom with as much effusion as the
superintendent could pump up under the circumstances; but it lacked
somewhat of the true gush, for the poor fellow's instinct taught him
that there was a mystery here that could not well bear the light,
perhaps; it was simply preposterous that this boy had warehoused two
thousand sheaves of Scriptural wisdom on his premises--a dozen would
strain his capacity, without a doubt.

Amy Lawrence was proud and glad, and she tried to make Tom see it in
her face--but he wouldn't look. She wondered; then she was just a grain
troubled; next a dim suspicion came and went--came again; she watched;
a furtive glance told her worlds--and then her heart broke, and she was
jealous, and angry, and the tears came and she hated everybody. Tom
most of all (she thought).

Tom was introduced to the Judge; but his tongue was tied, his breath
would hardly come, his heart quaked--partly because of the awful
greatness of the man, but mainly because he was her parent. He would
have liked to fall down and worship him, if it were in the dark. The
Judge put his hand on Tom's head and called him a fine little man, and
asked him what his name was. The boy stammered, gasped, and got it out:

"Tom."

"Oh, no, not Tom--it is--"

"Thomas."

"Ah, that's it. I thought there was more to it, maybe. That's very
well. But you've another one I daresay, and you'll tell it to me, won't
you?"

"Tell the gentleman your other name, Thomas," said Walters, "and say
sir. You mustn't forget your manners."

"Thomas Sawyer--sir."

"That's it! That's a good boy. Fine boy. Fine, manly little fellow.
Two thousand verses is a great many--very, very great many. And you
never can be sorry for the trouble you took to learn them; for
knowledge is worth more than anything there is in the world; it's what
makes great men and good men; you'll be a great man and a good man
yourself, some day, Thomas, and then you'll look back and say, It's all
owing to the precious Sunday-school privileges of my boyhood--it's all
owing to my dear teachers that taught me to learn--it's all owing to
the good superintendent, who encouraged me, and watched over me, and
gave me a beautiful Bible--a splendid elegant Bible--to keep and have
it all for my own, always--it's all owing to right bringing up! That is
what you will say, Thomas--and you wouldn't take any money for those
two thousand verses--no indeed you wouldn't. And now you wouldn't mind
telling me and this lady some of the things you've learned--no, I know
you wouldn't--for we are proud of little boys that learn. Now, no
doubt you know the names of all the twelve disciples. Won't you tell us
the names of the first two that were appointed?"

Tom was tugging at a button-hole and looking sheepish. He blushed,
now, and his eyes fell. Mr. Walters' heart sank within him. He said to
himself, it is not possible that the boy can answer the simplest
question--why DID the Judge ask him? Yet he felt obliged to speak up
and say:

"Answer the gentleman, Thomas--don't be afraid."

Tom still hung fire.

"Now I know you'll tell me," said the lady. "The names of the first
two disciples were--"

"DAVID AND GOLIAH!"

Let us draw the curtain of charity over the rest of the scene.

CHAPTER V

ABOUT half-past ten the cracked bell of the small church began to
ring, and presently the people began to gather for the morning sermon.
The Sunday-school children distributed themselves about the house and
occupied pews with their parents, so as to be under supervision. Aunt
Polly came, and Tom and Sid and Mary sat with her--Tom being placed
next the aisle, in order that he might be as far away from the open
window and the seductive outside summer scenes as possible. The crowd
filed up the aisles: the aged and needy postmaster, who had seen better
days; the mayor and his wife--for they had a mayor there, among other
unnecessaries; the justice of the peace; the widow Douglass, fair,
smart, and forty, a generous, good-hearted soul and well-to-do, her
hill mansion the only palace in the town, and the most hospitable and
much the most lavish in the matter of festivities that St. Petersburg
could boast; the bent and venerable Major and Mrs. Ward; lawyer
Riverson, the new notable from a distance; next the belle of the
village, followed by a troop of lawn-clad and ribbon-decked young
heart-breakers; then all the young clerks in town in a body--for they
had stood in the vestibule sucking their cane-heads, a circling wall of
oiled and simpering admirers, till the last girl had run their gantlet;
and last of all came the Model Boy, Willie Mufferson, taking as heedful
care of his mother as if she were cut glass. He always brought his
mother to church, and was the pride of all the matrons. The boys all
hated him, he was so good. And besides, he had been "thrown up to them"
so much. His white handkerchief was hanging out of his pocket behind, as
usual on Sundays--accidentally. Tom had no handkerchief, and he looked
upon boys who had as snobs.

The congregation being fully assembled, now, the bell rang once more,
to warn laggards and stragglers, and then a solemn hush fell upon the
church which was only broken by the tittering and whispering of the
choir in the gallery. The choir always tittered and whispered all
through service. There was once a church choir that was not ill-bred,
but I have forgotten where it was, now. It was a great many years ago,
and I can scarcely remember anything about it, but I think it was in
some foreign country.

The minister gave out the hymn, and read it through with a relish, in
a peculiar style which was much admired in that part of the country.
His voice began on a medium key and climbed steadily up till it reached
a certain point, where it bore with strong emphasis upon the topmost
word and then plunged down as if from a spring-board:

  Shall I be car-ri-ed toe the skies, on flow'ry BEDS of ease,

  Whilst others fight to win the prize, and sail thro' BLOODY seas?

He was regarded as a wonderful reader. At church "sociables" he was
always called upon to read poetry; and when he was through, the ladies
would lift up their hands and let them fall helplessly in their laps,
and "wall" their eyes, and shake their heads, as much as to say, "Words
cannot express it; it is too beautiful, TOO beautiful for this mortal
earth."

After the hymn had been sung, the Rev. Mr. Sprague turned himself into
a bulletin-board, and read off "notices" of meetings and societies and
things till it seemed that the list would stretch out to the crack of
doom--a queer custom which is still kept up in America, even in cities,
away here in this age of abundant newspapers. Often, the less there is
to justify a traditional custom, the harder it is to get rid of it.

And now the minister prayed. A good, generous prayer it was, and went
into details: it pleaded for the church, and the little children of the
church; for the other churches of the village; for the village itself;
for the county; for the State; for the State officers; for the United
States; for the churches of the United States; for Congress; for the
President; for the officers of the Government; for poor sailors, tossed
by stormy seas; for the oppressed millions groaning under the heel of
European monarchies and Oriental despotisms; for such as have the light
and the good tidings, and yet have not eyes to see nor ears to hear
withal; for the heathen in the far islands of the sea; and closed with
a supplication that the words he was about to speak might find grace
and favor, and be as seed sown in fertile ground, yielding in time a
grateful harvest of good. Amen.

There was a rustling of dresses, and the standing congregation sat
down. The boy whose history this book relates did not enjoy the prayer,
he only endured it--if he even did that much. He was restive all
through it; he kept tally of the details of the prayer, unconsciously
--for he was not listening, but he knew the ground of old, and the
clergyman's regular route over it--and when a little trifle of new
matter was interlarded, his ear detected it and his whole nature
resented it; he considered additions unfair, and scoundrelly. In the
midst of the prayer a fly had lit on the back of the pew in front of
him and tortured his spirit by calmly rubbing its hands together,
embracing its head with its arms, and polishing it so vigorously that
it seemed to almost part company with the body, and the slender thread
of a neck was exposed to view; scraping its wings with its hind legs
and smoothing them to its body as if they had been coat-tails; going
through its whole toilet as tranquilly as if it knew it was perfectly
safe. As indeed it was; for as sorely as Tom's hands itched to grab for
it they did not dare--he believed his soul would be instantly destroyed
if he did such a thing while the prayer was going on. But with the
closing sentence his hand began to curve and steal forward; and the
instant the "Amen" was out the fly was a prisoner of war. His aunt
detected the act and made him let it go.

The minister gave out his text and droned along monotonously through
an argument that was so prosy that many a head by and by began to nod
--and yet it was an argument that dealt in limitless fire and brimstone
and thinned the predestined elect down to a company so small as to be
hardly worth the saving. Tom counted the pages of the sermon; after
church he always knew how many pages there had been, but he seldom knew
anything else about the discourse. However, this time he was really
interested for a little while. The minister made a grand and moving
picture of the assembling together of the world's hosts at the
millennium when the lion and the lamb should lie down together and a
little child should lead them. But the pathos, the lesson, the moral of
the great spectacle were lost upon the boy; he only thought of the
conspicuousness of the principal character before the on-looking
nations; his face lit with the thought, and he said to himself that he
wished he could be that child, if it was a tame lion.

Now he lapsed into suffering again, as the dry argument was resumed.
Presently he bethought him of a treasure he had and got it out. It was
a large black beetle with formidable jaws--a "pinchbug," he called it.
It was in a percussion-cap box. The first thing the beetle did was to
take him by the finger. A natural fillip followed, the beetle went
floundering into the aisle and lit on its back, and the hurt finger
went into the boy's mouth. The beetle lay there working its helpless
legs, unable to turn over. Tom eyed it, and longed for it; but it was
safe out of his reach. Other people uninterested in the sermon found
relief in the beetle, and they eyed it too. Presently a vagrant poodle
dog came idling along, sad at heart, lazy with the summer softness and
the quiet, weary of captivity, sighing for change. He spied the beetle;
the drooping tail lifted and wagged. He surveyed the prize; walked
around it; smelt at it from a safe distance; walked around it again;
grew bolder, and took a closer smell; then lifted his lip and made a
gingerly snatch at it, just missing it; made another, and another;
began to enjoy the diversion; subsided to his stomach with the beetle
between his paws, and continued his experiments; grew weary at last,
and then indifferent and absent-minded. His head nodded, and little by
little his chin descended and touched the enemy, who seized it. There
was a sharp yelp, a flirt of the poodle's head, and the beetle fell a
couple of yards away, and lit on its back once more. The neighboring
spectators shook with a gentle inward joy, several faces went behind
fans and handkerchiefs, and Tom was entirely happy. The dog looked
foolish, and probably felt so; but there was resentment in his heart,
too, and a craving for revenge. So he went to the beetle and began a
wary attack on it again; jumping at it from every point of a circle,
lighting with his fore-paws within an inch of the creature, making even
closer snatches at it with his teeth, and jerking his head till his
ears flapped again. But he grew tired once more, after a while; tried
to amuse himself with a fly but found no relief; followed an ant
around, with his nose close to the floor, and quickly wearied of that;
yawned, sighed, forgot the beetle entirely, and sat down on it. Then
there was a wild yelp of agony and the poodle went sailing up the
aisle; the yelps continued, and so did the dog; he crossed the house in
front of the altar; he flew down the other aisle; he crossed before the
doors; he clamored up the home-stretch; his anguish grew with his
progress, till presently he was but a woolly comet moving in its orbit
with the gleam and the speed of light. At last the frantic sufferer
sheered from its course, and sprang into its master's lap; he flung it
out of the window, and the voice of distress quickly thinned away and
died in the distance.

By this time the whole church was red-faced and suffocating with
suppressed laughter, and the sermon had come to a dead standstill. The
discourse was resumed presently, but it went lame and halting, all
possibility of impressiveness being at an end; for even the gravest
sentiments were constantly being received with a smothered burst of
unholy mirth, under cover of some remote pew-back, as if the poor
parson had said a rarely facetious thing. It was a genuine relief to
the whole congregation when the ordeal was over and the benediction
pronounced.

Tom Sawyer went home quite cheerful, thinking to himself that there
was some satisfaction about divine service when there was a bit of
variety in it. He had but one marring thought; he was willing that the
dog should play with his pinchbug, but he did not think it was upright
in him to carry it off.

CHAPTER VI

MONDAY morning found Tom Sawyer miserable. Monday morning always found
him so--because it began another week's slow suffering in school. He
generally began that day with wishing he had had no intervening
holiday, it made the going into captivity and fetters again so much
more odious.

Tom lay thinking. Presently it occurred to him that he wished he was
sick; then he could stay home from school. Here was a vague
possibility. He canvassed his system. No ailment was found, and he
investigated again. This time he thought he could detect colicky
symptoms, and he began to encourage them with considerable hope. But
they soon grew feeble, and presently died wholly away. He reflected
further. Suddenly he discovered something. One of his upper front teeth
was loose. This was lucky; he was about to begin to groan, as a
"starter," as he called it, when it occurred to him that if he came
into court with that argument, his aunt would pull it out, and that
would hurt. So he thought he would hold the tooth in reserve for the
present, and seek further. Nothing offered for some little time, and
then he remembered hearing the doctor tell about a certain thing that
laid up a patient for two or three weeks and threatened to make him
lose a finger. So the boy eagerly drew his sore toe from under the
sheet and held it up for inspection. But now he did not know the
necessary symptoms. However, it seemed well worth while to chance it,
so he fell to groaning with considerable spirit.

But Sid slept on unconscious.

Tom groaned louder, and fancied that he began to feel pain in the toe.

No result from Sid.

Tom was panting with his exertions by this time. He took a rest and
then swelled himself up and fetched a succession of admirable groans.

Sid snored on.

Tom was aggravated. He said, "Sid, Sid!" and shook him. This course
worked well, and Tom began to groan again. Sid yawned, stretched, then
brought himself up on his elbow with a snort, and began to stare at
Tom. Tom went on groaning. Sid said:

"Tom! Say, Tom!" [No response.] "Here, Tom! TOM! What is the matter,
Tom?" And he shook him and looked in his face anxiously.

Tom moaned out:

"Oh, don't, Sid. Don't joggle me."

"Why, what's the matter, Tom? I must call auntie."

"No--never mind. It'll be over by and by, maybe. Don't call anybody."

"But I must! DON'T groan so, Tom, it's awful. How long you been this
way?"

"Hours. Ouch! Oh, don't stir so, Sid, you'll kill me."

"Tom, why didn't you wake me sooner? Oh, Tom, DON'T! It makes my
flesh crawl to hear you. Tom, what is the matter?"

"I forgive you everything, Sid. [Groan.] Everything you've ever done
to me. When I'm gone--"

"Oh, Tom, you ain't dying, are you? Don't, Tom--oh, don't. Maybe--"

"I forgive everybody, Sid. [Groan.] Tell 'em so, Sid. And Sid, you
give my window-sash and my cat with one eye to that new girl that's
come to town, and tell her--"

But Sid had snatched his clothes and gone. Tom was suffering in
reality, now, so handsomely was his imagination working, and so his
groans had gathered quite a genuine tone.

Sid flew down-stairs and said:

"Oh, Aunt Polly, come! Tom's dying!"

"Dying!"

"Yes'm. Don't wait--come quick!"

"Rubbage! I don't believe it!"

But she fled up-stairs, nevertheless, with Sid and Mary at her heels.
And her face grew white, too, and her lip trembled. When she reached
the bedside she gasped out:

"You, Tom! Tom, what's the matter with you?"

"Oh, auntie, I'm--"

"What's the matter with you--what is the matter with you, child?"

"Oh, auntie, my sore toe's mortified!"

The old lady sank down into a chair and laughed a little, then cried a
little, then did both together. This restored her and she said:

"Tom, what a turn you did give me. Now you shut up that nonsense and
climb out of this."

The groans ceased and the pain vanished from the toe. The boy felt a
little foolish, and he said:

"Aunt Polly, it SEEMED mortified, and it hurt so I never minded my
tooth at all."

"Your tooth, indeed! What's the matter with your tooth?"

"One of them's loose, and it aches perfectly awful."

"There, there, now, don't begin that groaning again. Open your mouth.
Well--your tooth IS loose, but you're not going to die about that.
Mary, get me a silk thread, and a chunk of fire out of the kitchen."

Tom said:

"Oh, please, auntie, don't pull it out. It don't hurt any more. I wish
I may never stir if it does. Please don't, auntie. I don't want to stay
home from school."

"Oh, you don't, don't you? So all this row was because you thought
you'd get to stay home from school and go a-fishing? Tom, Tom, I love
you so, and you seem to try every way you can to break my old heart
with your outrageousness." By this time the dental instruments were
ready. The old lady made one end of the silk thread fast to Tom's tooth
with a loop and tied the other to the bedpost. Then she seized the
chunk of fire and suddenly thrust it almost into the boy's face. The
tooth hung dangling by the bedpost, now.

But all trials bring their compensations. As Tom wended to school
after breakfast, he was the envy of every boy he met because the gap in
his upper row of teeth enabled him to expectorate in a new and
admirable way. He gathered quite a following of lads interested in the
exhibition; and one that had cut his finger and had been a centre of
fascination and homage up to this time, now found himself suddenly
without an adherent, and shorn of his glory. His heart was heavy, and
he said with a disdain which he did not feel that it wasn't anything to
spit like Tom Sawyer; but another boy said, "Sour grapes!" and he
wandered away a dismantled hero.

Shortly Tom came upon the juvenile pariah of the village, Huckleberry
Finn, son of the town drunkard. Huckleberry was cordially hated and
dreaded by all the mothers of the town, because he was idle and lawless
and vulgar and bad--and because all their children admired him so, and
delighted in his forbidden society, and wished they dared to be like
him. Tom was like the rest of the respectable boys, in that he envied
Huckleberry his gaudy outcast condition, and was under strict orders
not to play with him. So he played with him every time he got a chance.
Huckleberry was always dressed in the cast-off clothes of full-grown
men, and they were in perennial bloom and fluttering with rags. His hat
was a vast ruin with a wide crescent lopped out of its brim; his coat,
when he wore one, hung nearly to his heels and had the rearward buttons
far down the back; but one suspender supported his trousers; the seat
of the trousers bagged low and contained nothing, the fringed legs
dragged in the dirt when not rolled up.

Huckleberry came and went, at his own free will. He slept on doorsteps
in fine weather and in empty hogsheads in wet; he did not have to go to
school or to church, or call any being master or obey anybody; he could
go fishing or swimming when and where he chose, and stay as long as it
suited him; nobody forbade him to fight; he could sit up as late as he
pleased; he was always the first boy that went barefoot in the spring
and the last to resume leather in the fall; he never had to wash, nor
put on clean clothes; he could swear wonderfully. In a word, everything
that goes to make life precious that boy had. So thought every
harassed, hampered, respectable boy in St. Petersburg.

Tom hailed the romantic outcast:

"Hello, Huckleberry!"

"Hello yourself, and see how you like it."

"What's that you got?"

"Dead cat."

"Lemme see him, Huck. My, he's pretty stiff. Where'd you get him?"

"Bought him off'n a boy."

"What did you give?"

"I give a blue ticket and a bladder that I got at the slaughter-house."

"Where'd you get the blue ticket?"

"Bought it off'n Ben Rogers two weeks ago for a hoop-stick."

"Say--what is dead cats good for, Huck?"

"Good for? Cure warts with."

"No! Is that so? I know something that's better."

"I bet you don't. What is it?"

"Why, spunk-water."

"Spunk-water! I wouldn't give a dern for spunk-water."

"You wouldn't, wouldn't you? D'you ever try it?"

"No, I hain't. But Bob Tanner did."

"Who told you so!"

"Why, he told Jeff Thatcher, and Jeff told Johnny Baker, and Johnny
told Jim Hollis, and Jim told Ben Rogers, and Ben told a nigger, and
the nigger told me. There now!"

"Well, what of it? They'll all lie. Leastways all but the nigger. I
don't know HIM. But I never see a nigger that WOULDN'T lie. Shucks! Now
you tell me how Bob Tanner done it, Huck."

"Why, he took and dipped his hand in a rotten stump where the
rain-water was."

"In the daytime?"

"Certainly."

"With his face to the stump?"

"Yes. Least I reckon so."

"Did he say anything?"

"I don't reckon he did. I don't know."

"Aha! Talk about trying to cure warts with spunk-water such a blame
fool way as that! Why, that ain't a-going to do any good. You got to go
all by yourself, to the middle of the woods, where you know there's a
spunk-water stump, and just as it's midnight you back up against the
stump and jam your hand in and say:

  'Barley-corn, barley-corn, injun-meal shorts,
   Spunk-water, spunk-water, swaller these warts,'

and then walk away quick, eleven steps, with your eyes shut, and then
turn around three times and walk home without speaking to anybody.
Because if you speak the charm's busted."

"Well, that sounds like a good way; but that ain't the way Bob Tanner
done."

"No, sir, you can bet he didn't, becuz he's the wartiest boy in this
town; and he wouldn't have a wart on him if he'd knowed how to work
spunk-water. I've took off thousands of warts off of my hands that way,
Huck. I play with frogs so much that I've always got considerable many
warts. Sometimes I take 'em off with a bean."

"Yes, bean's good. I've done that."

"Have you? What's your way?"

"You take and split the bean, and cut the wart so as to get some
blood, and then you put the blood on one piece of the bean and take and
dig a hole and bury it 'bout midnight at the crossroads in the dark of
the moon, and then you burn up the rest of the bean. You see that piece
that's got the blood on it will keep drawing and drawing, trying to
fetch the other piece to it, and so that helps the blood to draw the
wart, and pretty soon off she comes."

"Yes, that's it, Huck--that's it; though when you're burying it if you
say 'Down bean; off wart; come no more to bother me!' it's better.
That's the way Joe Harper does, and he's been nearly to Coonville and
most everywheres. But say--how do you cure 'em with dead cats?"

"Why, you take your cat and go and get in the graveyard 'long about
midnight when somebody that was wicked has been buried; and when it's
midnight a devil will come, or maybe two or three, but you can't see
'em, you can only hear something like the wind, or maybe hear 'em talk;
and when they're taking that feller away, you heave your cat after 'em
and say, 'Devil follow corpse, cat follow devil, warts follow cat, I'm
done with ye!' That'll fetch ANY wart."

"Sounds right. D'you ever try it, Huck?"

"No, but old Mother Hopkins told me."

"Well, I reckon it's so, then. Becuz they say she's a witch."

"Say! Why, Tom, I KNOW she is. She witched pap. Pap says so his own
self. He come along one day, and he see she was a-witching him, so he
took up a rock, and if she hadn't dodged, he'd a got her. Well, that
very night he rolled off'n a shed wher' he was a layin drunk, and broke
his arm."

"Why, that's awful. How did he know she was a-witching him?"

"Lord, pap can tell, easy. Pap says when they keep looking at you
right stiddy, they're a-witching you. Specially if they mumble. Becuz
when they mumble they're saying the Lord's Prayer backards."

"Say, Hucky, when you going to try the cat?"

"To-night. I reckon they'll come after old Hoss Williams to-night."

"But they buried him Saturday. Didn't they get him Saturday night?"

"Why, how you talk! How could their charms work till midnight?--and
THEN it's Sunday. Devils don't slosh around much of a Sunday, I don't
reckon."

"I never thought of that. That's so. Lemme go with you?"

"Of course--if you ain't afeard."

"Afeard! 'Tain't likely. Will you meow?"

"Yes--and you meow back, if you get a chance. Last time, you kep' me
a-meowing around till old Hays went to throwing rocks at me and says
'Dern that cat!' and so I hove a brick through his window--but don't
you tell."

"I won't. I couldn't meow that night, becuz auntie was watching me,
but I'll meow this time. Say--what's that?"

"Nothing but a tick."

"Where'd you get him?"

"Out in the woods."

"What'll you take for him?"

"I don't know. I don't want to sell him."

"All right. It's a mighty small tick, anyway."

"Oh, anybody can run a tick down that don't belong to them. I'm
satisfied with it. It's a good enough tick for me."

"Sho, there's ticks a plenty. I could have a thousand of 'em if I
wanted to."

"Well, why don't you? Becuz you know mighty well you can't. This is a
pretty early tick, I reckon. It's the first one I've seen this year."

"Say, Huck--I'll give you my tooth for him."

"Less see it."

Tom got out a bit of paper and carefully unrolled it. Huckleberry
viewed it wistfully. The temptation was very strong. At last he said:

"Is it genuwyne?"

Tom lifted his lip and showed the vacancy.

"Well, all right," said Huckleberry, "it's a trade."

Tom enclosed the tick in the percussion-cap box that had lately been
the pinchbug's prison, and the boys separated, each feeling wealthier
than before.

When Tom reached the little isolated frame schoolhouse, he strode in
briskly, with the manner of one who had come with all honest speed.
He hung his hat on a peg and flung himself into his seat with
business-like alacrity. The master, throned on high in his great
splint-bottom arm-chair, was dozing, lulled by the drowsy hum of study.
The interruption roused him.

"Thomas Sawyer!"

Tom knew that when his name was pronounced in full, it meant trouble.

"Sir!"

"Come up here. Now, sir, why are you late again, as usual?"

Tom was about to take refuge in a lie, when he saw two long tails of
yellow hair hanging down a back that he recognized by the electric
sympathy of love; and by that form was THE ONLY VACANT PLACE on the
girls' side of the schoolhouse. He instantly said:

"I STOPPED TO TALK WITH HUCKLEBERRY FINN!"

The master's pulse stood still, and he stared helplessly. The buzz of
study ceased. The pupils wondered if this foolhardy boy had lost his
mind. The master said:

"You--you did what?"

"Stopped to talk with Huckleberry Finn."

There was no mistaking the words.

"Thomas Sawyer, this is the most astounding confession I have ever
listened to. No mere ferule will answer for this offence. Take off your
jacket."

The master's arm performed until it was tired and the stock of
switches notably diminished. Then the order followed:

"Now, sir, go and sit with the girls! And let this be a warning to you."

The titter that rippled around the room appeared to abash the boy, but
in reality that result was caused rather more by his worshipful awe of
his unknown idol and the dread pleasure that lay in his high good
fortune. He sat down upon the end of the pine bench and the girl
hitched herself away from him with a toss of her head. Nudges and winks
and whispers traversed the room, but Tom sat still, with his arms upon
the long, low desk before him, and seemed to study his book.

By and by attention ceased from him, and the accustomed school murmur
rose upon the dull air once more. Presently the boy began to steal
furtive glances at the girl. She observed it, "made a mouth" at him and
gave him the back of her head for the space of a minute. When she
cautiously faced around again, a peach lay before her. She thrust it
away. Tom gently put it back. She thrust it away again, but with less
animosity. Tom patiently returned it to its place. Then she let it
remain. Tom scrawled on his slate, "Please take it--I got more." The
girl glanced at the words, but made no sign. Now the boy began to draw
something on the slate, hiding his work with his left hand. For a time
the girl refused to notice; but her human curiosity presently began to
manifest itself by hardly perceptible signs. The boy worked on,
apparently unconscious. The girl made a sort of noncommittal attempt to
see, but the boy did not betray that he was aware of it. At last she
gave in and hesitatingly whispered:

"Let me see it."

Tom partly uncovered a dismal caricature of a house with two gable
ends to it and a corkscrew of smoke issuing from the chimney. Then the
girl's interest began to fasten itself upon the work and she forgot
everything else. When it was finished, she gazed a moment, then
whispered:

"It's nice--make a man."

The artist erected a man in the front yard, that resembled a derrick.
He could have stepped over the house; but the girl was not
hypercritical; she was satisfied with the monster, and whispered:

"It's a beautiful man--now make me coming along."

Tom drew an hour-glass with a full moon and straw limbs to it and
armed the spreading fingers with a portentous fan. The girl said:

"It's ever so nice--I wish I could draw."

"It's easy," whispered Tom, "I'll learn you."

"Oh, will you? When?"

"At noon. Do you go home to dinner?"

"I'll stay if you will."

"Good--that's a whack. What's your name?"

"Becky Thatcher. What's yours? Oh, I know. It's Thomas Sawyer."

"That's the name they lick me by. I'm Tom when I'm good. You call me
Tom, will you?"

"Yes."

Now Tom began to scrawl something on the slate, hiding the words from
the girl. But she was not backward this time. She begged to see. Tom
said:

"Oh, it ain't anything."

"Yes it is."

"No it ain't. You don't want to see."

"Yes I do, indeed I do. Please let me."

"You'll tell."

"No I won't--deed and deed and double deed won't."

"You won't tell anybody at all? Ever, as long as you live?"

"No, I won't ever tell ANYbody. Now let me."

"Oh, YOU don't want to see!"

"Now that you treat me so, I WILL see." And she put her small hand
upon his and a little scuffle ensued, Tom pretending to resist in
earnest but letting his hand slip by degrees till these words were
revealed: "I LOVE YOU."

"Oh, you bad thing!" And she hit his hand a smart rap, but reddened
and looked pleased, nevertheless.

Just at this juncture the boy felt a slow, fateful grip closing on his
ear, and a steady lifting impulse. In that wise he was borne across the
house and deposited in his own seat, under a peppering fire of giggles
from the whole school. Then the master stood over him during a few
awful moments, and finally moved away to his throne without saying a
word. But although Tom's ear tingled, his heart was jubilant.

As the school quieted down Tom made an honest effort to study, but the
turmoil within him was too great. In turn he took his place in the
reading class and made a botch of it; then in the geography class and
turned lakes into mountains, mountains into rivers, and rivers into
continents, till chaos was come again; then in the spelling class, and
got "turned down," by a succession of mere baby words, till he brought
up at the foot and yielded up the pewter medal which he had worn with
ostentation for months.

CHAPTER VII

THE harder Tom tried to fasten his mind on his book, the more his
ideas wandered. So at last, with a sigh and a yawn, he gave it up. It
seemed to him that the noon recess would never come. The air was
utterly dead. There was not a breath stirring. It was the sleepiest of
sleepy days. The drowsing murmur of the five and twenty studying
scholars soothed the soul like the spell that is in the murmur of bees.
Away off in the flaming sunshine, Cardiff Hill lifted its soft green
sides through a shimmering veil of heat, tinted with the purple of
distance; a few birds floated on lazy wing high in the air; no other
living thing was visible but some cows, and they were asleep. Tom's
heart ached to be free, or else to have something of interest to do to
pass the dreary time. His hand wandered into his pocket and his face
lit up with a glow of gratitude that was prayer, though he did not know
it. Then furtively the percussion-cap box came out. He released the
tick and put him on the long flat desk. The creature probably glowed
with a gratitude that amounted to prayer, too, at this moment, but it
was premature: for when he started thankfully to travel off, Tom turned
him aside with a pin and made him take a new direction.

Tom's bosom friend sat next him, suffering just as Tom had been, and
now he was deeply and gratefully interested in this entertainment in an
instant. This bosom friend was Joe Harper. The two boys were sworn
friends all the week, and embattled enemies on Saturdays. Joe took a
pin out of his lapel and began to assist in exercising the prisoner.
The sport grew in interest momently. Soon Tom said that they were
interfering with each other, and neither getting the fullest benefit of
the tick. So he put Joe's slate on the desk and drew a line down the
middle of it from top to bottom.

"Now," said he, "as long as he is on your side you can stir him up and
I'll let him alone; but if you let him get away and get on my side,
you're to leave him alone as long as I can keep him from crossing over."

"All right, go ahead; start him up."

The tick escaped from Tom, presently, and crossed the equator. Joe
harassed him awhile, and then he got away and crossed back again. This
change of base occurred often. While one boy was worrying the tick with
absorbing interest, the other would look on with interest as strong,
the two heads bowed together over the slate, and the two souls dead to
all things else. At last luck seemed to settle and abide with Joe. The
tick tried this, that, and the other course, and got as excited and as
anxious as the boys themselves, but time and again just as he would
have victory in his very grasp, so to speak, and Tom's fingers would be
twitching to begin, Joe's pin would deftly head him off, and keep
possession. At last Tom could stand it no longer. The temptation was
too strong. So he reached out and lent a hand with his pin. Joe was
angry in a moment. Said he:

"Tom, you let him alone."

"I only just want to stir him up a little, Joe."

"No, sir, it ain't fair; you just let him alone."

"Blame it, I ain't going to stir him much."

"Let him alone, I tell you."

"I won't!"

"You shall--he's on my side of the line."

"Look here, Joe Harper, whose is that tick?"

"I don't care whose tick he is--he's on my side of the line, and you
sha'n't touch him."

"Well, I'll just bet I will, though. He's my tick and I'll do what I
blame please with him, or die!"

A tremendous whack came down on Tom's shoulders, and its duplicate on
Joe's; and for the space of two minutes the dust continued to fly from
the two jackets and the whole school to enjoy it. The boys had been too
absorbed to notice the hush that had stolen upon the school awhile
before when the master came tiptoeing down the room and stood over
them. He had contemplated a good part of the performance before he
contributed his bit of variety to it.

When school broke up at noon, Tom flew to Becky Thatcher, and
whispered in her ear:

"Put on your bonnet and let on you're going home; and when you get to
the corner, give the rest of 'em the slip, and turn down through the
lane and come back. I'll go the other way and come it over 'em the same
way."

So the one went off with one group of scholars, and the other with
another. In a little while the two met at the bottom of the lane, and
when they reached the school they had it all to themselves. Then they
sat together, with a slate before them, and Tom gave Becky the pencil
and held her hand in his, guiding it, and so created another surprising
house. When the interest in art began to wane, the two fell to talking.
Tom was swimming in bliss. He said:

"Do you love rats?"

"No! I hate them!"

"Well, I do, too--LIVE ones. But I mean dead ones, to swing round your
head with a string."

"No, I don't care for rats much, anyway. What I like is chewing-gum."

"Oh, I should say so! I wish I had some now."

"Do you? I've got some. I'll let you chew it awhile, but you must give
it back to me."

That was agreeable, so they chewed it turn about, and dangled their
legs against the bench in excess of contentment.

"Was you ever at a circus?" said Tom.

"Yes, and my pa's going to take me again some time, if I'm good."

"I been to the circus three or four times--lots of times. Church ain't
shucks to a circus. There's things going on at a circus all the time.
I'm going to be a clown in a circus when I grow up."

"Oh, are you! That will be nice. They're so lovely, all spotted up."

"Yes, that's so. And they get slathers of money--most a dollar a day,
Ben Rogers says. Say, Becky, was you ever engaged?"

"What's that?"

"Why, engaged to be married."

"No."

"Would you like to?"

"I reckon so. I don't know. What is it like?"

"Like? Why it ain't like anything. You only just tell a boy you won't
ever have anybody but him, ever ever ever, and then you kiss and that's
all. Anybody can do it."

"Kiss? What do you kiss for?"

"Why, that, you know, is to--well, they always do that."

"Everybody?"

"Why, yes, everybody that's in love with each other. Do you remember
what I wrote on the slate?"

"Ye--yes."

"What was it?"

"I sha'n't tell you."

"Shall I tell YOU?"

"Ye--yes--but some other time."

"No, now."

"No, not now--to-morrow."

"Oh, no, NOW. Please, Becky--I'll whisper it, I'll whisper it ever so
easy."

Becky hesitating, Tom took silence for consent, and passed his arm
about her waist and whispered the tale ever so softly, with his mouth
close to her ear. And then he added:

"Now you whisper it to me--just the same."

She resisted, for a while, and then said:

"You turn your face away so you can't see, and then I will. But you
mustn't ever tell anybody--WILL you, Tom? Now you won't, WILL you?"

"No, indeed, indeed I won't. Now, Becky."

He turned his face away. She bent timidly around till her breath
stirred his curls and whispered, "I--love--you!"

Then she sprang away and ran around and around the desks and benches,
with Tom after her, and took refuge in a corner at last, with her
little white apron to her face. Tom clasped her about her neck and
pleaded:

"Now, Becky, it's all done--all over but the kiss. Don't you be afraid
of that--it ain't anything at all. Please, Becky." And he tugged at her
apron and the hands.

By and by she gave up, and let her hands drop; her face, all glowing
with the struggle, came up and submitted. Tom kissed the red lips and
said:

"Now it's all done, Becky. And always after this, you know, you ain't
ever to love anybody but me, and you ain't ever to marry anybody but
me, ever never and forever. Will you?"

"No, I'll never love anybody but you, Tom, and I'll never marry
anybody but you--and you ain't to ever marry anybody but me, either."

"Certainly. Of course. That's PART of it. And always coming to school
or when we're going home, you're to walk with me, when there ain't
anybody looking--and you choose me and I choose you at parties, because
that's the way you do when you're engaged."

"It's so nice. I never heard of it before."

"Oh, it's ever so gay! Why, me and Amy Lawrence--"

The big eyes told Tom his blunder and he stopped, confused.

"Oh, Tom! Then I ain't the first you've ever been engaged to!"

The child began to cry. Tom said:

"Oh, don't cry, Becky, I don't care for her any more."

"Yes, you do, Tom--you know you do."

Tom tried to put his arm about her neck, but she pushed him away and
turned her face to the wall, and went on crying. Tom tried again, with
soothing words in his mouth, and was repulsed again. Then his pride was
up, and he strode away and went outside. He stood about, restless and
uneasy, for a while, glancing at the door, every now and then, hoping
she would repent and come to find him. But she did not. Then he began
to feel badly and fear that he was in the wrong. It was a hard struggle
with him to make new advances, now, but he nerved himself to it and
entered. She was still standing back there in the corner, sobbing, with
her face to the wall. Tom's heart smote him. He went to her and stood a
moment, not knowing exactly how to proceed. Then he said hesitatingly:

"Becky, I--I don't care for anybody but you."

No reply--but sobs.

"Becky"--pleadingly. "Becky, won't you say something?"

More sobs.

Tom got out his chiefest jewel, a brass knob from the top of an
andiron, and passed it around her so that she could see it, and said:

"Please, Becky, won't you take it?"

She struck it to the floor. Then Tom marched out of the house and over
the hills and far away, to return to school no more that day. Presently
Becky began to suspect. She ran to the door; he was not in sight; she
flew around to the play-yard; he was not there. Then she called:

"Tom! Come back, Tom!"

She listened intently, but there was no answer. She had no companions
but silence and loneliness. So she sat down to cry again and upbraid
herself; and by this time the scholars began to gather again, and she
had to hide her griefs and still her broken heart and take up the cross
of a long, dreary, aching afternoon, with none among the strangers
about her to exchange sorrows with.

CHAPTER VIII

TOM dodged hither and thither through lanes until he was well out of
the track of returning scholars, and then fell into a moody jog. He
crossed a small "branch" two or three times, because of a prevailing
juvenile superstition that to cross water baffled pursuit. Half an hour
later he was disappearing behind the Douglas mansion on the summit of
Cardiff Hill, and the schoolhouse was hardly distinguishable away off
in the valley behind him. He entered a dense wood, picked his pathless
way to the centre of it, and sat down on a mossy spot under a spreading
oak. There was not even a zephyr stirring; the dead noonday heat had
even stilled the songs of the birds; nature lay in a trance that was
broken by no sound but the occasional far-off hammering of a
woodpecker, and this seemed to render the pervading silence and sense
of loneliness the more profound. The boy's soul was steeped in
melancholy; his feelings were in happy accord with his surroundings. He
sat long with his elbows on his knees and his chin in his hands,
meditating. It seemed to him that life was but a trouble, at best, and
he more than half envied Jimmy Hodges, so lately released; it must be
very peaceful, he thought, to lie and slumber and dream forever and
ever, with the wind whispering through the trees and caressing the
grass and the flowers over the grave, and nothing to bother and grieve
about, ever any more. If he only had a clean Sunday-school record he
could be willing to go, and be done with it all. Now as to this girl.
What had he done? Nothing. He had meant the best in the world, and been
treated like a dog--like a very dog. She would be sorry some day--maybe
when it was too late. Ah, if he could only die TEMPORARILY!

But the elastic heart of youth cannot be compressed into one
constrained shape long at a time. Tom presently began to drift
insensibly back into the concerns of this life again. What if he turned
his back, now, and disappeared mysteriously? What if he went away--ever
so far away, into unknown countries beyond the seas--and never came
back any more! How would she feel then! The idea of being a clown
recurred to him now, only to fill him with disgust. For frivolity and
jokes and spotted tights were an offense, when they intruded themselves
upon a spirit that was exalted into the vague august realm of the
romantic. No, he would be a soldier, and return after long years, all
war-worn and illustrious. No--better still, he would join the Indians,
and hunt buffaloes and go on the warpath in the mountain ranges and the
trackless great plains of the Far West, and away in the future come
back a great chief, bristling with feathers, hideous with paint, and
prance into Sunday-school, some drowsy summer morning, with a
bloodcurdling war-whoop, and sear the eyeballs of all his companions
with unappeasable envy. But no, there was something gaudier even than
this. He would be a pirate! That was it! NOW his future lay plain
before him, and glowing with unimaginable splendor. How his name would
fill the world, and make people shudder! How gloriously he would go
plowing the dancing seas, in his long, low, black-hulled racer, the
Spirit of the Storm, with his grisly flag flying at the fore! And at
the zenith of his fame, how he would suddenly appear at the old village
and stalk into church, brown and weather-beaten, in his black velvet
doublet and trunks, his great jack-boots, his crimson sash, his belt
bristling with horse-pistols, his crime-rusted cutlass at his side, his
slouch hat with waving plumes, his black flag unfurled, with the skull
and crossbones on it, and hear with swelling ecstasy the whisperings,
"It's Tom Sawyer the Pirate!--the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main!"

Yes, it was settled; his career was determined. He would run away from
home and enter upon it. He would start the very next morning. Therefore
he must now begin to get ready. He would collect his resources
together. He went to a rotten log near at hand and began to dig under
one end of it with his Barlow knife. He soon struck wood that sounded
hollow. He put his hand there and uttered this incantation impressively:

"What hasn't come here, come! What's here, stay here!"

Then he scraped away the dirt, and exposed a pine shingle. He took it
up and disclosed a shapely little treasure-house whose bottom and sides
were of shingles. In it lay a marble. Tom's astonishment was boundless!
He scratched his head with a perplexed air, and said:

"Well, that beats anything!"

Then he tossed the marble away pettishly, and stood cogitating. The
truth was, that a superstition of his had failed, here, which he and
all his comrades had always looked upon as infallible. If you buried a
marble with certain necessary incantations, and left it alone a
fortnight, and then opened the place with the incantation he had just
used, you would find that all the marbles you had ever lost had
gathered themselves together there, meantime, no matter how widely they
had been separated. But now, this thing had actually and unquestionably
failed. Tom's whole structure of faith was shaken to its foundations.
He had many a time heard of this thing succeeding but never of its
failing before. It did not occur to him that he had tried it several
times before, himself, but could never find the hiding-places
afterward. He puzzled over the matter some time, and finally decided
that some witch had interfered and broken the charm. He thought he
would satisfy himself on that point; so he searched around till he
found a small sandy spot with a little funnel-shaped depression in it.
He laid himself down and put his mouth close to this depression and
called--

"Doodle-bug, doodle-bug, tell me what I want to know! Doodle-bug,
doodle-bug, tell me what I want to know!"

The sand began to work, and presently a small black bug appeared for a
second and then darted under again in a fright.

"He dasn't tell! So it WAS a witch that done it. I just knowed it."

He well knew the futility of trying to contend against witches, so he
gave up discouraged. But it occurred to him that he might as well have
the marble he had just thrown away, and therefore he went and made a
patient search for it. But he could not find it. Now he went back to
his treasure-house and carefully placed himself just as he had been
standing when he tossed the marble away; then he took another marble
from his pocket and tossed it in the same way, saying:

"Brother, go find your brother!"

He watched where it stopped, and went there and looked. But it must
have fallen short or gone too far; so he tried twice more. The last
repetition was successful. The two marbles lay within a foot of each
other.

Just here the blast of a toy tin trumpet came faintly down the green
aisles of the forest. Tom flung off his jacket and trousers, turned a
suspender into a belt, raked away some brush behind the rotten log,
disclosing a rude bow and arrow, a lath sword and a tin trumpet, and in
a moment had seized these things and bounded away, barelegged, with
fluttering shirt. He presently halted under a great elm, blew an
answering blast, and then began to tiptoe and look warily out, this way
and that. He said cautiously--to an imaginary company:

"Hold, my merry men! Keep hid till I blow."

Now appeared Joe Harper, as airily clad and elaborately armed as Tom.
Tom called:

"Hold! Who comes here into Sherwood Forest without my pass?"

"Guy of Guisborne wants no man's pass. Who art thou that--that--"

"Dares to hold such language," said Tom, prompting--for they talked
"by the book," from memory.

"Who art thou that dares to hold such language?"

"I, indeed! I am Robin Hood, as thy caitiff carcase soon shall know."

"Then art thou indeed that famous outlaw? Right gladly will I dispute
with thee the passes of the merry wood. Have at thee!"

They took their lath swords, dumped their other traps on the ground,
struck a fencing attitude, foot to foot, and began a grave, careful
combat, "two up and two down." Presently Tom said:

"Now, if you've got the hang, go it lively!"

So they "went it lively," panting and perspiring with the work. By and
by Tom shouted:

"Fall! fall! Why don't you fall?"

"I sha'n't! Why don't you fall yourself? You're getting the worst of
it."

"Why, that ain't anything. I can't fall; that ain't the way it is in
the book. The book says, 'Then with one back-handed stroke he slew poor
Guy of Guisborne.' You're to turn around and let me hit you in the
back."

There was no getting around the authorities, so Joe turned, received
the whack and fell.

"Now," said Joe, getting up, "you got to let me kill YOU. That's fair."

"Why, I can't do that, it ain't in the book."

"Well, it's blamed mean--that's all."

"Well, say, Joe, you can be Friar Tuck or Much the miller's son, and
lam me with a quarter-staff; or I'll be the Sheriff of Nottingham and
you be Robin Hood a little while and kill me."

This was satisfactory, and so these adventures were carried out. Then
Tom became Robin Hood again, and was allowed by the treacherous nun to
bleed his strength away through his neglected wound. And at last Joe,
representing a whole tribe of weeping outlaws, dragged him sadly forth,
gave his bow into his feeble hands, and Tom said, "Where this arrow
falls, there bury poor Robin Hood under the greenwood tree." Then he
shot the arrow and fell back and would have died, but he lit on a
nettle and sprang up too gaily for a corpse.

The boys dressed themselves, hid their accoutrements, and went off
grieving that there were no outlaws any more, and wondering what modern
civilization could claim to have done to compensate for their loss.
They said they would rather be outlaws a year in Sherwood Forest than
President of the United States forever.

CHAPTER IX

AT half-past nine, that night, Tom and Sid were sent to bed, as usual.
They said their prayers, and Sid was soon asleep. Tom lay awake and
waited, in restless impatience. When it seemed to him that it must be
nearly daylight, he heard the clock strike ten! This was despair. He
would have tossed and fidgeted, as his nerves demanded, but he was
afraid he might wake Sid. So he lay still, and stared up into the dark.
Everything was dismally still. By and by, out of the stillness, little,
scarcely perceptible noises began to emphasize themselves. The ticking
of the clock began to bring itself into notice. Old beams began to
crack mysteriously. The stairs creaked faintly. Evidently spirits were
abroad. A measured, muffled snore issued from Aunt Polly's chamber. And
now the tiresome chirping of a cricket that no human ingenuity could
locate, began. Next the ghastly ticking of a deathwatch in the wall at
the bed's head made Tom shudder--it meant that somebody's days were
numbered. Then the howl of a far-off dog rose on the night air, and was
answered by a fainter howl from a remoter distance. Tom was in an
agony. At last he was satisfied that time had ceased and eternity
begun; he began to doze, in spite of himself; the clock chimed eleven,
but he did not hear it. And then there came, mingling with his
half-formed dreams, a most melancholy caterwauling. The raising of a
neighboring window disturbed him. A cry of "Scat! you devil!" and the
crash of an empty bottle against the back of his aunt's woodshed
brought him wide awake, and a single minute later he was dressed and
out of the window and creeping along the roof of the "ell" on all
fours. He "meow'd" with caution once or twice, as he went; then jumped
to the roof of the woodshed and thence to the ground. Huckleberry Finn
was there, with his dead cat. The boys moved off and disappeared in the
gloom. At the end of half an hour they were wading through the tall
grass of the graveyard.

It was a graveyard of the old-fashioned Western kind. It was on a
hill, about a mile and a half from the village. It had a crazy board
fence around it, which leaned inward in places, and outward the rest of
the time, but stood upright nowhere. Grass and weeds grew rank over the
whole cemetery. All the old graves were sunken in, there was not a
tombstone on the place; round-topped, worm-eaten boards staggered over
the graves, leaning for support and finding none. "Sacred to the memory
of" So-and-So had been painted on them once, but it could no longer
have been read, on the most of them, now, even if there had been light.

A faint wind moaned through the trees, and Tom feared it might be the
spirits of the dead, complaining at being disturbed. The boys talked
little, and only under their breath, for the time and the place and the
pervading solemnity and silence oppressed their spirits. They found the
sharp new heap they were seeking, and ensconced themselves within the
protection of three great elms that grew in a bunch within a few feet
of the grave.

Then they waited in silence for what seemed a long time. The hooting
of a distant owl was all the sound that troubled the dead stillness.
Tom's reflections grew oppressive. He must force some talk. So he said
in a whisper:

"Hucky, do you believe the dead people like it for us to be here?"

Huckleberry whispered:

"I wisht I knowed. It's awful solemn like, AIN'T it?"

"I bet it is."

There was a considerable pause, while the boys canvassed this matter
inwardly. Then Tom whispered:

"Say, Hucky--do you reckon Hoss Williams hears us talking?"

"O' course he does. Least his sperrit does."

Tom, after a pause:

"I wish I'd said Mister Williams. But I never meant any harm.
Everybody calls him Hoss."

"A body can't be too partic'lar how they talk 'bout these-yer dead
people, Tom."

This was a damper, and conversation died again.

Presently Tom seized his comrade's arm and said:

"Sh!"

"What is it, Tom?" And the two clung together with beating hearts.

"Sh! There 'tis again! Didn't you hear it?"

"I--"

"There! Now you hear it."

"Lord, Tom, they're coming! They're coming, sure. What'll we do?"

"I dono. Think they'll see us?"

"Oh, Tom, they can see in the dark, same as cats. I wisht I hadn't
come."

"Oh, don't be afeard. I don't believe they'll bother us. We ain't
doing any harm. If we keep perfectly still, maybe they won't notice us
at all."

"I'll try to, Tom, but, Lord, I'm all of a shiver."

"Listen!"

The boys bent their heads together and scarcely breathed. A muffled
sound of voices floated up from the far end of the graveyard.

"Look! See there!" whispered Tom. "What is it?"

"It's devil-fire. Oh, Tom, this is awful."

Some vague figures approached through the gloom, swinging an
old-fashioned tin lantern that freckled the ground with innumerable
little spangles of light. Presently Huckleberry whispered with a
shudder:

"It's the devils sure enough. Three of 'em! Lordy, Tom, we're goners!
Can you pray?"

"I'll try, but don't you be afeard. They ain't going to hurt us. 'Now
I lay me down to sleep, I--'"

"Sh!"

"What is it, Huck?"

"They're HUMANS! One of 'em is, anyway. One of 'em's old Muff Potter's
voice."

"No--'tain't so, is it?"

"I bet I know it. Don't you stir nor budge. He ain't sharp enough to
notice us. Drunk, the same as usual, likely--blamed old rip!"

"All right, I'll keep still. Now they're stuck. Can't find it. Here
they come again. Now they're hot. Cold again. Hot again. Red hot!
They're p'inted right, this time. Say, Huck, I know another o' them
voices; it's Injun Joe."

"That's so--that murderin' half-breed! I'd druther they was devils a
dern sight. What kin they be up to?"

The whisper died wholly out, now, for the three men had reached the
grave and stood within a few feet of the boys' hiding-place.

"Here it is," said the third voice; and the owner of it held the
lantern up and revealed the face of young Doctor Robinson.

Potter and Injun Joe were carrying a handbarrow with a rope and a
couple of shovels on it. They cast down their load and began to open
the grave. The doctor put the lantern at the head of the grave and came
and sat down with his back against one of the elm trees. He was so
close the boys could have touched him.

"Hurry, men!" he said, in a low voice; "the moon might come out at any
moment."

They growled a response and went on digging. For some time there was
no noise but the grating sound of the spades discharging their freight
of mould and gravel. It was very monotonous. Finally a spade struck
upon the coffin with a dull woody accent, and within another minute or
two the men had hoisted it out on the ground. They pried off the lid
with their shovels, got out the body and dumped it rudely on the
ground. The moon drifted from behind the clouds and exposed the pallid
face. The barrow was got ready and the corpse placed on it, covered
with a blanket, and bound to its place with the rope. Potter took out a
large spring-knife and cut off the dangling end of the rope and then
said:

"Now the cussed thing's ready, Sawbones, and you'll just out with
another five, or here she stays."

"That's the talk!" said Injun Joe.

"Look here, what does this mean?" said the doctor. "You required your
pay in advance, and I've paid you."

"Yes, and you done more than that," said Injun Joe, approaching the
doctor, who was now standing. "Five years ago you drove me away from
your father's kitchen one night, when I come to ask for something to
eat, and you said I warn't there for any good; and when I swore I'd get
even with you if it took a hundred years, your father had me jailed for
a vagrant. Did you think I'd forget? The Injun blood ain't in me for
nothing. And now I've GOT you, and you got to SETTLE, you know!"

He was threatening the doctor, with his fist in his face, by this
time. The doctor struck out suddenly and stretched the ruffian on the
ground. Potter dropped his knife, and exclaimed:

"Here, now, don't you hit my pard!" and the next moment he had
grappled with the doctor and the two were struggling with might and
main, trampling the grass and tearing the ground with their heels.
Injun Joe sprang to his feet, his eyes flaming with passion, snatched
up Potter's knife, and went creeping, catlike and stooping, round and
round about the combatants, seeking an opportunity. All at once the
doctor flung himself free, seized the heavy headboard of Williams'
grave and felled Potter to the earth with it--and in the same instant
the half-breed saw his chance and drove the knife to the hilt in the
young man's breast. He reeled and fell partly upon Potter, flooding him
with his blood, and in the same moment the clouds blotted out the
dreadful spectacle and the two frightened boys went speeding away in
the dark.

Presently, when the moon emerged again, Injun Joe was standing over
the two forms, contemplating them. The doctor murmured inarticulately,
gave a long gasp or two and was still. The half-breed muttered:

"THAT score is settled--damn you."

Then he robbed the body. After which he put the fatal knife in
Potter's open right hand, and sat down on the dismantled coffin. Three
--four--five minutes passed, and then Potter began to stir and moan. His
hand closed upon the knife; he raised it, glanced at it, and let it
fall, with a shudder. Then he sat up, pushing the body from him, and
gazed at it, and then around him, confusedly. His eyes met Joe's.

"Lord, how is this, Joe?" he said.

"It's a dirty business," said Joe, without moving.

"What did you do it for?"

"I! I never done it!"

"Look here! That kind of talk won't wash."

Potter trembled and grew white.

"I thought I'd got sober. I'd no business to drink to-night. But it's
in my head yet--worse'n when we started here. I'm all in a muddle;
can't recollect anything of it, hardly. Tell me, Joe--HONEST, now, old
feller--did I do it? Joe, I never meant to--'pon my soul and honor, I
never meant to, Joe. Tell me how it was, Joe. Oh, it's awful--and him
so young and promising."

"Why, you two was scuffling, and he fetched you one with the headboard
and you fell flat; and then up you come, all reeling and staggering
like, and snatched the knife and jammed it into him, just as he fetched
you another awful clip--and here you've laid, as dead as a wedge til
now."

"Oh, I didn't know what I was a-doing. I wish I may die this minute if
I did. It was all on account of the whiskey and the excitement, I
reckon. I never used a weepon in my life before, Joe. I've fought, but
never with weepons. They'll all say that. Joe, don't tell! Say you
won't tell, Joe--that's a good feller. I always liked you, Joe, and
stood up for you, too. Don't you remember? You WON'T tell, WILL you,
Joe?" And the poor creature dropped on his knees before the stolid
murderer, and clasped his appealing hands.

"No, you've always been fair and square with me, Muff Potter, and I
won't go back on you. There, now, that's as fair as a man can say."

"Oh, Joe, you're an angel. I'll bless you for this the longest day I
live." And Potter began to cry.

"Come, now, that's enough of that. This ain't any time for blubbering.
You be off yonder way and I'll go this. Move, now, and don't leave any
tracks behind you."

Potter started on a trot that quickly increased to a run. The
half-breed stood looking after him. He muttered:

"If he's as much stunned with the lick and fuddled with the rum as he
had the look of being, he won't think of the knife till he's gone so
far he'll be afraid to come back after it to such a place by himself
--chicken-heart!"

Two or three minutes later the murdered man, the blanketed corpse, the
lidless coffin, and the open grave were under no inspection but the
moon's. The stillness was complete again, too.

CHAPTER X

THE two boys flew on and on, toward the village, speechless with
horror. They glanced backward over their shoulders from time to time,
apprehensively, as if they feared they might be followed. Every stump
that started up in their path seemed a man and an enemy, and made them
catch their breath; and as they sped by some outlying cottages that lay
near the village, the barking of the aroused watch-dogs seemed to give
wings to their feet.

"If we can only get to the old tannery before we break down!"
whispered Tom, in short catches between breaths. "I can't stand it much
longer."

Huckleberry's hard pantings were his only reply, and the boys fixed
their eyes on the goal of their hopes and bent to their work to win it.
They gained steadily on it, and at last, breast to breast, they burst
through the open door and fell grateful and exhausted in the sheltering
shadows beyond. By and by their pulses slowed down, and Tom whispered:

"Huckleberry, what do you reckon'll come of this?"

"If Doctor Robinson dies, I reckon hanging'll come of it."

"Do you though?"

"Why, I KNOW it, Tom."

Tom thought a while, then he said:

"Who'll tell? We?"

"What are you talking about? S'pose something happened and Injun Joe
DIDN'T hang? Why, he'd kill us some time or other, just as dead sure as
we're a laying here."

"That's just what I was thinking to myself, Huck."

"If anybody tells, let Muff Potter do it, if he's fool enough. He's
generally drunk enough."

Tom said nothing--went on thinking. Presently he whispered:

"Huck, Muff Potter don't know it. How can he tell?"

"What's the reason he don't know it?"

"Because he'd just got that whack when Injun Joe done it. D'you reckon
he could see anything? D'you reckon he knowed anything?"

"By hokey, that's so, Tom!"

"And besides, look-a-here--maybe that whack done for HIM!"

"No, 'taint likely, Tom. He had liquor in him; I could see that; and
besides, he always has. Well, when pap's full, you might take and belt
him over the head with a church and you couldn't phase him. He says so,
his own self. So it's the same with Muff Potter, of course. But if a
man was dead sober, I reckon maybe that whack might fetch him; I dono."

After another reflective silence, Tom said:

"Hucky, you sure you can keep mum?"

"Tom, we GOT to keep mum. You know that. That Injun devil wouldn't
make any more of drownding us than a couple of cats, if we was to
squeak 'bout this and they didn't hang him. Now, look-a-here, Tom, less
take and swear to one another--that's what we got to do--swear to keep
mum."

"I'm agreed. It's the best thing. Would you just hold hands and swear
that we--"

"Oh no, that wouldn't do for this. That's good enough for little
rubbishy common things--specially with gals, cuz THEY go back on you
anyway, and blab if they get in a huff--but there orter be writing
'bout a big thing like this. And blood."

Tom's whole being applauded this idea. It was deep, and dark, and
awful; the hour, the circumstances, the surroundings, were in keeping
with it. He picked up a clean pine shingle that lay in the moonlight,
took a little fragment of "red keel" out of his pocket, got the moon on
his work, and painfully scrawled these lines, emphasizing each slow
down-stroke by clamping his tongue between his teeth, and letting up
the pressure on the up-strokes. [See next page.]

   "Huck Finn and
    Tom Sawyer swears
    they will keep mum
    about This and They
    wish They may Drop
    down dead in Their
    Tracks if They ever
    Tell and Rot."

Huckleberry was filled with admiration of Tom's facility in writing,
and the sublimity of his language. He at once took a pin from his lapel
and was going to prick his flesh, but Tom said:

"Hold on! Don't do that. A pin's brass. It might have verdigrease on
it."

"What's verdigrease?"

"It's p'ison. That's what it is. You just swaller some of it once
--you'll see."

So Tom unwound the thread from one of his needles, and each boy
pricked the ball of his thumb and squeezed out a drop of blood. In
time, after many squeezes, Tom managed to sign his initials, using the
ball of his little finger for a pen. Then he showed Huckleberry how to
make an H and an F, and the oath was complete. They buried the shingle
close to the wall, with some dismal ceremonies and incantations, and
the fetters that bound their tongues were considered to be locked and
the key thrown away.

A figure crept stealthily through a break in the other end of the
ruined building, now, but they did not notice it.

"Tom," whispered Huckleberry, "does this keep us from EVER telling
--ALWAYS?"

"Of course it does. It don't make any difference WHAT happens, we got
to keep mum. We'd drop down dead--don't YOU know that?"

"Yes, I reckon that's so."

They continued to whisper for some little time. Presently a dog set up
a long, lugubrious howl just outside--within ten feet of them. The boys
clasped each other suddenly, in an agony of fright.

"Which of us does he mean?" gasped Huckleberry.

"I dono--peep through the crack. Quick!"

"No, YOU, Tom!"

"I can't--I can't DO it, Huck!"

"Please, Tom. There 'tis again!"

"Oh, lordy, I'm thankful!" whispered Tom. "I know his voice. It's Bull
Harbison." *

[* If Mr. Harbison owned a slave named Bull, Tom would have spoken of
him as "Harbison's Bull," but a son or a dog of that name was "Bull
Harbison."]

"Oh, that's good--I tell you, Tom, I was most scared to death; I'd a
bet anything it was a STRAY dog."

The dog howled again. The boys' hearts sank once more.

"Oh, my! that ain't no Bull Harbison!" whispered Huckleberry. "DO, Tom!"

Tom, quaking with fear, yielded, and put his eye to the crack. His
whisper was hardly audible when he said:

"Oh, Huck, IT S A STRAY DOG!"

"Quick, Tom, quick! Who does he mean?"

"Huck, he must mean us both--we're right together."

"Oh, Tom, I reckon we're goners. I reckon there ain't no mistake 'bout
where I'LL go to. I been so wicked."

"Dad fetch it! This comes of playing hookey and doing everything a
feller's told NOT to do. I might a been good, like Sid, if I'd a tried
--but no, I wouldn't, of course. But if ever I get off this time, I lay
I'll just WALLER in Sunday-schools!" And Tom began to snuffle a little.

"YOU bad!" and Huckleberry began to snuffle too. "Consound it, Tom
Sawyer, you're just old pie, 'longside o' what I am. Oh, LORDY, lordy,
lordy, I wisht I only had half your chance."

Tom choked off and whispered:

"Look, Hucky, look! He's got his BACK to us!"

Hucky looked, with joy in his heart.

"Well, he has, by jingoes! Did he before?"

"Yes, he did. But I, like a fool, never thought. Oh, this is bully,
you know. NOW who can he mean?"

The howling stopped. Tom pricked up his ears.

"Sh! What's that?" he whispered.

"Sounds like--like hogs grunting. No--it's somebody snoring, Tom."

"That IS it! Where 'bouts is it, Huck?"

"I bleeve it's down at 'tother end. Sounds so, anyway. Pap used to
sleep there, sometimes, 'long with the hogs, but laws bless you, he
just lifts things when HE snores. Besides, I reckon he ain't ever
coming back to this town any more."

The spirit of adventure rose in the boys' souls once more.

"Hucky, do you das't to go if I lead?"

"I don't like to, much. Tom, s'pose it's Injun Joe!"

Tom quailed. But presently the temptation rose up strong again and the
boys agreed to try, with the understanding that they would take to
their heels if the snoring stopped. So they went tiptoeing stealthily
down, the one behind the other. When they had got to within five steps
of the snorer, Tom stepped on a stick, and it broke with a sharp snap.
The man moaned, writhed a little, and his face came into the moonlight.
It was Muff Potter. The boys' hearts had stood still, and their hopes
too, when the man moved, but their fears passed away now. They tiptoed
out, through the broken weather-boarding, and stopped at a little
distance to exchange a parting word. That long, lugubrious howl rose on
the night air again! They turned and saw the strange dog standing
within a few feet of where Potter was lying, and FACING Potter, with
his nose pointing heavenward.

"Oh, geeminy, it's HIM!" exclaimed both boys, in a breath.

"Say, Tom--they say a stray dog come howling around Johnny Miller's
house, 'bout midnight, as much as two weeks ago; and a whippoorwill
come in and lit on the banisters and sung, the very same evening; and
there ain't anybody dead there yet."

"Well, I know that. And suppose there ain't. Didn't Gracie Miller fall
in the kitchen fire and burn herself terrible the very next Saturday?"

"Yes, but she ain't DEAD. And what's more, she's getting better, too."

"All right, you wait and see. She's a goner, just as dead sure as Muff
Potter's a goner. That's what the niggers say, and they know all about
these kind of things, Huck."

Then they separated, cogitating. When Tom crept in at his bedroom
window the night was almost spent. He undressed with excessive caution,
and fell asleep congratulating himself that nobody knew of his
escapade. He was not aware that the gently-snoring Sid was awake, and
had been so for an hour.

When Tom awoke, Sid was dressed and gone. There was a late look in the
light, a late sense in the atmosphere. He was startled. Why had he not
been called--persecuted till he was up, as usual? The thought filled
him with bodings. Within five minutes he was dressed and down-stairs,
feeling sore and drowsy. The family were still at table, but they had
finished breakfast. There was no voice of rebuke; but there were
averted eyes; there was a silence and an air of solemnity that struck a
chill to the culprit's heart. He sat down and tried to seem gay, but it
was up-hill work; it roused no smile, no response, and he lapsed into
silence and let his heart sink down to the depths.

After breakfast his aunt took him aside, and Tom almost brightened in
the hope that he was going to be flogged; but it was not so. His aunt
wept over him and asked him how he could go and break her old heart so;
and finally told him to go on, and ruin himself and bring her gray
hairs with sorrow to the grave, for it was no use for her to try any
more. This was worse than a thousand whippings, and Tom's heart was
sorer now than his body. He cried, he pleaded for forgiveness, promised
to reform over and over again, and then received his dismissal, feeling
that he had won but an imperfect forgiveness and established but a
feeble confidence.

He left the presence too miserable to even feel revengeful toward Sid;
and so the latter's prompt retreat through the back gate was
unnecessary. He moped to school gloomy and sad, and took his flogging,
along with Joe Harper, for playing hookey the day before, with the air
of one whose heart was busy with heavier woes and wholly dead to
trifles. Then he betook himself to his seat, rested his elbows on his
desk and his jaws in his hands, and stared at the wall with the stony
stare of suffering that has reached the limit and can no further go.
His elbow was pressing against some hard substance. After a long time
he slowly and sadly changed his position, and took up this object with
a sigh. It was in a paper. He unrolled it. A long, lingering, colossal
sigh followed, and his heart broke. It was his brass andiron knob!

This final feather broke the camel's back.

CHAPTER XI

CLOSE upon the hour of noon the whole village was suddenly electrified
with the ghastly news. No need of the as yet undreamed-of telegraph;
the tale flew from man to man, from group to group, from house to
house, with little less than telegraphic speed. Of course the
schoolmaster gave holiday for that afternoon; the town would have
thought strangely of him if he had not.

A gory knife had been found close to the murdered man, and it had been
recognized by somebody as belonging to Muff Potter--so the story ran.
And it was said that a belated citizen had come upon Potter washing
himself in the "branch" about one or two o'clock in the morning, and
that Potter had at once sneaked off--suspicious circumstances,
especially the washing which was not a habit with Potter. It was also
said that the town had been ransacked for this "murderer" (the public
are not slow in the matter of sifting evidence and arriving at a
verdict), but that he could not be found. Horsemen had departed down
all the roads in every direction, and the Sheriff "was confident" that
he would be captured before night.

All the town was drifting toward the graveyard. Tom's heartbreak
vanished and he joined the procession, not because he would not a
thousand times rather go anywhere else, but because an awful,
unaccountable fascination drew him on. Arrived at the dreadful place,
he wormed his small body through the crowd and saw the dismal
spectacle. It seemed to him an age since he was there before. Somebody
pinched his arm. He turned, and his eyes met Huckleberry's. Then both
looked elsewhere at once, and wondered if anybody had noticed anything
in their mutual glance. But everybody was talking, and intent upon the
grisly spectacle before them.

"Poor fellow!" "Poor young fellow!" "This ought to be a lesson to
grave robbers!" "Muff Potter'll hang for this if they catch him!" This
was the drift of remark; and the minister said, "It was a judgment; His
hand is here."

Now Tom shivered from head to heel; for his eye fell upon the stolid
face of Injun Joe. At this moment the crowd began to sway and struggle,
and voices shouted, "It's him! it's him! he's coming himself!"

"Who? Who?" from twenty voices.

"Muff Potter!"

"Hallo, he's stopped!--Look out, he's turning! Don't let him get away!"

People in the branches of the trees over Tom's head said he wasn't
trying to get away--he only looked doubtful and perplexed.

"Infernal impudence!" said a bystander; "wanted to come and take a
quiet look at his work, I reckon--didn't expect any company."

The crowd fell apart, now, and the Sheriff came through,
ostentatiously leading Potter by the arm. The poor fellow's face was
haggard, and his eyes showed the fear that was upon him. When he stood
before the murdered man, he shook as with a palsy, and he put his face
in his hands and burst into tears.

"I didn't do it, friends," he sobbed; "'pon my word and honor I never
done it."

"Who's accused you?" shouted a voice.

This shot seemed to carry home. Potter lifted his face and looked
around him with a pathetic hopelessness in his eyes. He saw Injun Joe,
and exclaimed:

"Oh, Injun Joe, you promised me you'd never--"

"Is that your knife?" and it was thrust before him by the Sheriff.

Potter would have fallen if they had not caught him and eased him to
the ground. Then he said:

"Something told me 't if I didn't come back and get--" He shuddered;
then waved his nerveless hand with a vanquished gesture and said, "Tell
'em, Joe, tell 'em--it ain't any use any more."

Then Huckleberry and Tom stood dumb and staring, and heard the
stony-hearted liar reel off his serene statement, they expecting every
moment that the clear sky would deliver God's lightnings upon his head,
and wondering to see how long the stroke was delayed. And when he had
finished and still stood alive and whole, their wavering impulse to
break their oath and save the poor betrayed prisoner's life faded and
vanished away, for plainly this miscreant had sold himself to Satan and
it would be fatal to meddle with the property of such a power as that.

"Why didn't you leave? What did you want to come here for?" somebody
said.

"I couldn't help it--I couldn't help it," Potter moaned. "I wanted to
run away, but I couldn't seem to come anywhere but here." And he fell
to sobbing again.

Injun Joe repeated his statement, just as calmly, a few minutes
afterward on the inquest, under oath; and the boys, seeing that the
lightnings were still withheld, were confirmed in their belief that Joe
had sold himself to the devil. He was now become, to them, the most
balefully interesting object they had ever looked upon, and they could
not take their fascinated eyes from his face.

They inwardly resolved to watch him nights, when opportunity should
offer, in the hope of getting a glimpse of his dread master.

Injun Joe helped to raise the body of the murdered man and put it in a
wagon for removal; and it was whispered through the shuddering crowd
that the wound bled a little! The boys thought that this happy
circumstance would turn suspicion in the right direction; but they were
disappointed, for more than one villager remarked:

"It was within three feet of Muff Potter when it done it."

Tom's fearful secret and gnawing conscience disturbed his sleep for as
much as a week after this; and at breakfast one morning Sid said:

"Tom, you pitch around and talk in your sleep so much that you keep me
awake half the time."

Tom blanched and dropped his eyes.

"It's a bad sign," said Aunt Polly, gravely. "What you got on your
mind, Tom?"

"Nothing. Nothing 't I know of." But the boy's hand shook so that he
spilled his coffee.

"And you do talk such stuff," Sid said. "Last night you said, 'It's
blood, it's blood, that's what it is!' You said that over and over. And
you said, 'Don't torment me so--I'll tell!' Tell WHAT? What is it
you'll tell?"

Everything was swimming before Tom. There is no telling what might
have happened, now, but luckily the concern passed out of Aunt Polly's
face and she came to Tom's relief without knowing it. She said:

"Sho! It's that dreadful murder. I dream about it most every night
myself. Sometimes I dream it's me that done it."

Mary said she had been affected much the same way. Sid seemed
satisfied. Tom got out of the presence as quick as he plausibly could,
and after that he complained of toothache for a week, and tied up his
jaws every night. He never knew that Sid lay nightly watching, and
frequently slipped the bandage free and then leaned on his elbow
listening a good while at a time, and afterward slipped the bandage
back to its place again. Tom's distress of mind wore off gradually and
the toothache grew irksome and was discarded. If Sid really managed to
make anything out of Tom's disjointed mutterings, he kept it to himself.

It seemed to Tom that his schoolmates never would get done holding
inquests on dead cats, and thus keeping his trouble present to his
mind. Sid noticed that Tom never was coroner at one of these inquiries,
though it had been his habit to take the lead in all new enterprises;
he noticed, too, that Tom never acted as a witness--and that was
strange; and Sid did not overlook the fact that Tom even showed a
marked aversion to these inquests, and always avoided them when he
could. Sid marvelled, but said nothing. However, even inquests went out
of vogue at last, and ceased to torture Tom's conscience.

Every day or two, during this time of sorrow, Tom watched his
opportunity and went to the little grated jail-window and smuggled such
small comforts through to the "murderer" as he could get hold of. The
jail was a trifling little brick den that stood in a marsh at the edge
of the village, and no guards were afforded for it; indeed, it was
seldom occupied. These offerings greatly helped to ease Tom's
conscience.

The villagers had a strong desire to tar-and-feather Injun Joe and
ride him on a rail, for body-snatching, but so formidable was his
character that nobody could be found who was willing to take the lead
in the matter, so it was dropped. He had been careful to begin both of
his inquest-statements with the fight, without confessing the
grave-robbery that preceded it; therefore it was deemed wisest not
to try the case in the courts at present.

CHAPTER XII

ONE of the reasons why Tom's mind had drifted away from its secret
troubles was, that it had found a new and weighty matter to interest
itself about. Becky Thatcher had stopped coming to school. Tom had
struggled with his pride a few days, and tried to "whistle her down the
wind," but failed. He began to find himself hanging around her father's
house, nights, and feeling very miserable. She was ill. What if she
should die! There was distraction in the thought. He no longer took an
interest in war, nor even in piracy. The charm of life was gone; there
was nothing but dreariness left. He put his hoop away, and his bat;
there was no joy in them any more. His aunt was concerned. She began to
try all manner of remedies on him. She was one of those people who are
infatuated with patent medicines and all new-fangled methods of
producing health or mending it. She was an inveterate experimenter in
these things. When something fresh in this line came out she was in a
fever, right away, to try it; not on herself, for she was never ailing,
but on anybody else that came handy. She was a subscriber for all the
"Health" periodicals and phrenological frauds; and the solemn ignorance
they were inflated with was breath to her nostrils. All the "rot" they
contained about ventilation, and how to go to bed, and how to get up,
and what to eat, and what to drink, and how much exercise to take, and
what frame of mind to keep one's self in, and what sort of clothing to
wear, was all gospel to her, and she never observed that her
health-journals of the current month customarily upset everything they
had recommended the month before. She was as simple-hearted and honest
as the day was long, and so she was an easy victim. She gathered
together her quack periodicals and her quack medicines, and thus armed
with death, went about on her pale horse, metaphorically speaking, with
"hell following after." But she never suspected that she was not an
angel of healing and the balm of Gilead in disguise, to the suffering
neighbors.

The water treatment was new, now, and Tom's low condition was a
windfall to her. She had him out at daylight every morning, stood him
up in the woodshed and drowned him with a deluge of cold water; then
she scrubbed him down with a towel like a file, and so brought him to;
then she rolled him up in a wet sheet and put him away under blankets
till she sweated his soul clean and "the yellow stains of it came
through his pores"--as Tom said.

Yet notwithstanding all this, the boy grew more and more melancholy
and pale and dejected. She added hot baths, sitz baths, shower baths,
and plunges. The boy remained as dismal as a hearse. She began to
assist the water with a slim oatmeal diet and blister-plasters. She
calculated his capacity as she would a jug's, and filled him up every
day with quack cure-alls.

Tom had become indifferent to persecution by this time. This phase
filled the old lady's heart with consternation. This indifference must
be broken up at any cost. Now she heard of Pain-killer for the first
time. She ordered a lot at once. She tasted it and was filled with
gratitude. It was simply fire in a liquid form. She dropped the water
treatment and everything else, and pinned her faith to Pain-killer. She
gave Tom a teaspoonful and watched with the deepest anxiety for the
result. Her troubles were instantly at rest, her soul at peace again;
for the "indifference" was broken up. The boy could not have shown a
wilder, heartier interest, if she had built a fire under him.

Tom felt that it was time to wake up; this sort of life might be
romantic enough, in his blighted condition, but it was getting to have
too little sentiment and too much distracting variety about it. So he
thought over various plans for relief, and finally hit pon that of
professing to be fond of Pain-killer. He asked for it so often that he
became a nuisance, and his aunt ended by telling him to help himself
and quit bothering her. If it had been Sid, she would have had no
misgivings to alloy her delight; but since it was Tom, she watched the
bottle clandestinely. She found that the medicine did really diminish,
but it did not occur to her that the boy was mending the health of a
crack in the sitting-room floor with it.

One day Tom was in the act of dosing the crack when his aunt's yellow
cat came along, purring, eying the teaspoon avariciously, and begging
for a taste. Tom said:

"Don't ask for it unless you want it, Peter."

But Peter signified that he did want it.

"You better make sure."

Peter was sure.

"Now you've asked for it, and I'll give it to you, because there ain't
anything mean about me; but if you find you don't like it, you mustn't
blame anybody but your own self."

Peter was agreeable. So Tom pried his mouth open and poured down the
Pain-killer. Peter sprang a couple of yards in the air, and then
delivered a war-whoop and set off round and round the room, banging
against furniture, upsetting flower-pots, and making general havoc.
Next he rose on his hind feet and pranced around, in a frenzy of
enjoyment, with his head over his shoulder and his voice proclaiming
his unappeasable happiness. Then he went tearing around the house again
spreading chaos and destruction in his path. Aunt Polly entered in time
to see him throw a few double summersets, deliver a final mighty
hurrah, and sail through the open window, carrying the rest of the
flower-pots with him. The old lady stood petrified with astonishment,
peering over her glasses; Tom lay on the floor expiring with laughter.

"Tom, what on earth ails that cat?"

"I don't know, aunt," gasped the boy.

"Why, I never see anything like it. What did make him act so?"

"Deed I don't know, Aunt Polly; cats always act so when they're having
a good time."

"They do, do they?" There was something in the tone that made Tom
apprehensive.

"Yes'm. That is, I believe they do."

"You DO?"

"Yes'm."

The old lady was bending down, Tom watching, with interest emphasized
by anxiety. Too late he divined her "drift." The handle of the telltale
teaspoon was visible under the bed-valance. Aunt Polly took it, held it
up. Tom winced, and dropped his eyes. Aunt Polly raised him by the
usual handle--his ear--and cracked his head soundly with her thimble.

"Now, sir, what did you want to treat that poor dumb beast so, for?"

"I done it out of pity for him--because he hadn't any aunt."

"Hadn't any aunt!--you numskull. What has that got to do with it?"

"Heaps. Because if he'd had one she'd a burnt him out herself! She'd a
roasted his bowels out of him 'thout any more feeling than if he was a
human!"

Aunt Polly felt a sudden pang of remorse. This was putting the thing
in a new light; what was cruelty to a cat MIGHT be cruelty to a boy,
too. She began to soften; she felt sorry. Her eyes watered a little,
and she put her hand on Tom's head and said gently:

"I was meaning for the best, Tom. And, Tom, it DID do you good."

Tom looked up in her face with just a perceptible twinkle peeping
through his gravity.

"I know you was meaning for the best, aunty, and so was I with Peter.
It done HIM good, too. I never see him get around so since--"

"Oh, go 'long with you, Tom, before you aggravate me again. And you
try and see if you can't be a good boy, for once, and you needn't take
any more medicine."

Tom reached school ahead of time. It was noticed that this strange
thing had been occurring every day latterly. And now, as usual of late,
he hung about the gate of the schoolyard instead of playing with his
comrades. He was sick, he said, and he looked it. He tried to seem to
be looking everywhere but whither he really was looking--down the road.
Presently Jeff Thatcher hove in sight, and Tom's face lighted; he gazed
a moment, and then turned sorrowfully away. When Jeff arrived, Tom
accosted him; and "led up" warily to opportunities for remark about
Becky, but the giddy lad never could see the bait. Tom watched and
watched, hoping whenever a frisking frock came in sight, and hating the
owner of it as soon as he saw she was not the right one. At last frocks
ceased to appear, and he dropped hopelessly into the dumps; he entered
the empty schoolhouse and sat down to suffer. Then one more frock
passed in at the gate, and Tom's heart gave a great bound. The next
instant he was out, and "going on" like an Indian; yelling, laughing,
chasing boys, jumping over the fence at risk of life and limb, throwing
handsprings, standing on his head--doing all the heroic things he could
conceive of, and keeping a furtive eye out, all the while, to see if
Becky Thatcher was noticing. But she seemed to be unconscious of it
all; she never looked. Could it be possible that she was not aware that
he was there? He carried his exploits to her immediate vicinity; came
war-whooping around, snatched a boy's cap, hurled it to the roof of the
schoolhouse, broke through a group of boys, tumbling them in every
direction, and fell sprawling, himself, under Becky's nose, almost
upsetting her--and she turned, with her nose in the air, and he heard
her say: "Mf! some people think they're mighty smart--always showing
off!"

Tom's cheeks burned. He gathered himself up and sneaked off, crushed
and crestfallen.

CHAPTER XIII

TOM'S mind was made up now. He was gloomy and desperate. He was a
forsaken, friendless boy, he said; nobody loved him; when they found
out what they had driven him to, perhaps they would be sorry; he had
tried to do right and get along, but they would not let him; since
nothing would do them but to be rid of him, let it be so; and let them
blame HIM for the consequences--why shouldn't they? What right had the
friendless to complain? Yes, they had forced him to it at last: he
would lead a life of crime. There was no choice.

By this time he was far down Meadow Lane, and the bell for school to
"take up" tinkled faintly upon his ear. He sobbed, now, to think he
should never, never hear that old familiar sound any more--it was very
hard, but it was forced on him; since he was driven out into the cold
world, he must submit--but he forgave them. Then the sobs came thick
and fast.

Just at this point he met his soul's sworn comrade, Joe Harper
--hard-eyed, and with evidently a great and dismal purpose in his heart.
Plainly here were "two souls with but a single thought." Tom, wiping
his eyes with his sleeve, began to blubber out something about a
resolution to escape from hard usage and lack of sympathy at home by
roaming abroad into the great world never to return; and ended by
hoping that Joe would not forget him.

But it transpired that this was a request which Joe had just been
going to make of Tom, and had come to hunt him up for that purpose. His
mother had whipped him for drinking some cream which he had never
tasted and knew nothing about; it was plain that she was tired of him
and wished him to go; if she felt that way, there was nothing for him
to do but succumb; he hoped she would be happy, and never regret having
driven her poor boy out into the unfeeling world to suffer and die.

As the two boys walked sorrowing along, they made a new compact to
stand by each other and be brothers and never separate till death
relieved them of their troubles. Then they began to lay their plans.
Joe was for being a hermit, and living on crusts in a remote cave, and
dying, some time, of cold and want and grief; but after listening to
Tom, he conceded that there were some conspicuous advantages about a
life of crime, and so he consented to be a pirate.

Three miles below St. Petersburg, at a point where the Mississippi
River was a trifle over a mile wide, there was a long, narrow, wooded
island, with a shallow bar at the head of it, and this offered well as
a rendezvous. It was not inhabited; it lay far over toward the further
shore, abreast a dense and almost wholly unpeopled forest. So Jackson's
Island was chosen. Who were to be the subjects of their piracies was a
matter that did not occur to them. Then they hunted up Huckleberry
Finn, and he joined them promptly, for all careers were one to him; he
was indifferent. They presently separated to meet at a lonely spot on
the river-bank two miles above the village at the favorite hour--which
was midnight. There was a small log raft there which they meant to
capture. Each would bring hooks and lines, and such provision as he
could steal in the most dark and mysterious way--as became outlaws. And
before the afternoon was done, they had all managed to enjoy the sweet
glory of spreading the fact that pretty soon the town would "hear
something." All who got this vague hint were cautioned to "be mum and
wait."

About midnight Tom arrived with a boiled ham and a few trifles,
and stopped in a dense undergrowth on a small bluff overlooking the
meeting-place. It was starlight, and very still. The mighty river lay
like an ocean at rest. Tom listened a moment, but no sound disturbed the
quiet. Then he gave a low, distinct whistle. It was answered from under
the bluff. Tom whistled twice more; these signals were answered in the
same way. Then a guarded voice said:

"Who goes there?"

"Tom Sawyer, the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main. Name your names."

"Huck Finn the Red-Handed, and Joe Harper the Terror of the Seas." Tom
had furnished these titles, from his favorite literature.

"'Tis well. Give the countersign."

Two hoarse whispers delivered the same awful word simultaneously to
the brooding night:

"BLOOD!"

Then Tom tumbled his ham over the bluff and let himself down after it,
tearing both skin and clothes to some extent in the effort. There was
an easy, comfortable path along the shore under the bluff, but it
lacked the advantages of difficulty and danger so valued by a pirate.

The Terror of the Seas had brought a side of bacon, and had about worn
himself out with getting it there. Finn the Red-Handed had stolen a
skillet and a quantity of half-cured leaf tobacco, and had also brought
a few corn-cobs to make pipes with. But none of the pirates smoked or
"chewed" but himself. The Black Avenger of the Spanish Main said it
would never do to start without some fire. That was a wise thought;
matches were hardly known there in that day. They saw a fire
smouldering upon a great raft a hundred yards above, and they went
stealthily thither and helped themselves to a chunk. They made an
imposing adventure of it, saying, "Hist!" every now and then, and
suddenly halting with finger on lip; moving with hands on imaginary
dagger-hilts; and giving orders in dismal whispers that if "the foe"
stirred, to "let him have it to the hilt," because "dead men tell no
tales." They knew well enough that the raftsmen were all down at the
village laying in stores or having a spree, but still that was no
excuse for their conducting this thing in an unpiratical way.

They shoved off, presently, Tom in command, Huck at the after oar and
Joe at the forward. Tom stood amidships, gloomy-browed, and with folded
arms, and gave his orders in a low, stern whisper:

"Luff, and bring her to the wind!"

"Aye-aye, sir!"

"Steady, steady-y-y-y!"

"Steady it is, sir!"

"Let her go off a point!"

"Point it is, sir!"

As the boys steadily and monotonously drove the raft toward mid-stream
it was no doubt understood that these orders were given only for
"style," and were not intended to mean anything in particular.

"What sail's she carrying?"

"Courses, tops'ls, and flying-jib, sir."

"Send the r'yals up! Lay out aloft, there, half a dozen of ye
--foretopmaststuns'l! Lively, now!"

"Aye-aye, sir!"

"Shake out that maintogalans'l! Sheets and braces! NOW my hearties!"

"Aye-aye, sir!"

"Hellum-a-lee--hard a port! Stand by to meet her when she comes! Port,
port! NOW, men! With a will! Stead-y-y-y!"

"Steady it is, sir!"

The raft drew beyond the middle of the river; the boys pointed her
head right, and then lay on their oars. The river was not high, so
there was not more than a two or three mile current. Hardly a word was
said during the next three-quarters of an hour. Now the raft was
passing before the distant town. Two or three glimmering lights showed
where it lay, peacefully sleeping, beyond the vague vast sweep of
star-gemmed water, unconscious of the tremendous event that was happening.
The Black Avenger stood still with folded arms, "looking his last" upon
the scene of his former joys and his later sufferings, and wishing
"she" could see him now, abroad on the wild sea, facing peril and death
with dauntless heart, going to his doom with a grim smile on his lips.
It was but a small strain on his imagination to remove Jackson's Island
beyond eyeshot of the village, and so he "looked his last" with a
broken and satisfied heart. The other pirates were looking their last,
too; and they all looked so long that they came near letting the
current drift them out of the range of the island. But they discovered
the danger in time, and made shift to avert it. About two o'clock in
the morning the raft grounded on the bar two hundred yards above the
head of the island, and they waded back and forth until they had landed
their freight. Part of the little raft's belongings consisted of an old
sail, and this they spread over a nook in the bushes for a tent to
shelter their provisions; but they themselves would sleep in the open
air in good weather, as became outlaws.

They built a fire against the side of a great log twenty or thirty
steps within the sombre depths of the forest, and then cooked some
bacon in the frying-pan for supper, and used up half of the corn "pone"
stock they had brought. It seemed glorious sport to be feasting in that
wild, free way in the virgin forest of an unexplored and uninhabited
island, far from the haunts of men, and they said they never would
return to civilization. The climbing fire lit up their faces and threw
its ruddy glare upon the pillared tree-trunks of their forest temple,
and upon the varnished foliage and festooning vines.

When the last crisp slice of bacon was gone, and the last allowance of
corn pone devoured, the boys stretched themselves out on the grass,
filled with contentment. They could have found a cooler place, but they
would not deny themselves such a romantic feature as the roasting
camp-fire.

"AIN'T it gay?" said Joe.

"It's NUTS!" said Tom. "What would the boys say if they could see us?"

"Say? Well, they'd just die to be here--hey, Hucky!"

"I reckon so," said Huckleberry; "anyways, I'm suited. I don't want
nothing better'n this. I don't ever get enough to eat, gen'ally--and
here they can't come and pick at a feller and bullyrag him so."

"It's just the life for me," said Tom. "You don't have to get up,
mornings, and you don't have to go to school, and wash, and all that
blame foolishness. You see a pirate don't have to do ANYTHING, Joe,
when he's ashore, but a hermit HE has to be praying considerable, and
then he don't have any fun, anyway, all by himself that way."

"Oh yes, that's so," said Joe, "but I hadn't thought much about it,
you know. I'd a good deal rather be a pirate, now that I've tried it."

"You see," said Tom, "people don't go much on hermits, nowadays, like
they used to in old times, but a pirate's always respected. And a
hermit's got to sleep on the hardest place he can find, and put
sackcloth and ashes on his head, and stand out in the rain, and--"

"What does he put sackcloth and ashes on his head for?" inquired Huck.

"I dono. But they've GOT to do it. Hermits always do. You'd have to do
that if you was a hermit."

"Dern'd if I would," said Huck.

"Well, what would you do?"

"I dono. But I wouldn't do that."

"Why, Huck, you'd HAVE to. How'd you get around it?"

"Why, I just wouldn't stand it. I'd run away."

"Run away! Well, you WOULD be a nice old slouch of a hermit. You'd be
a disgrace."

The Red-Handed made no response, being better employed. He had
finished gouging out a cob, and now he fitted a weed stem to it, loaded
it with tobacco, and was pressing a coal to the charge and blowing a
cloud of fragrant smoke--he was in the full bloom of luxurious
contentment. The other pirates envied him this majestic vice, and
secretly resolved to acquire it shortly. Presently Huck said:

"What does pirates have to do?"

Tom said:

"Oh, they have just a bully time--take ships and burn them, and get
the money and bury it in awful places in their island where there's
ghosts and things to watch it, and kill everybody in the ships--make
'em walk a plank."

"And they carry the women to the island," said Joe; "they don't kill
the women."

"No," assented Tom, "they don't kill the women--they're too noble. And
the women's always beautiful, too.

"And don't they wear the bulliest clothes! Oh no! All gold and silver
and di'monds," said Joe, with enthusiasm.

"Who?" said Huck.

"Why, the pirates."

Huck scanned his own clothing forlornly.

"I reckon I ain't dressed fitten for a pirate," said he, with a
regretful pathos in his voice; "but I ain't got none but these."

But the other boys told him the fine clothes would come fast enough,
after they should have begun their adventures. They made him understand
that his poor rags would do to begin with, though it was customary for
wealthy pirates to start with a proper wardrobe.

Gradually their talk died out and drowsiness began to steal upon the
eyelids of the little waifs. The pipe dropped from the fingers of the
Red-Handed, and he slept the sleep of the conscience-free and the
weary. The Terror of the Seas and the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main
had more difficulty in getting to sleep. They said their prayers
inwardly, and lying down, since there was nobody there with authority
to make them kneel and recite aloud; in truth, they had a mind not to
say them at all, but they were afraid to proceed to such lengths as
that, lest they might call down a sudden and special thunderbolt from
heaven. Then at once they reached and hovered upon the imminent verge
of sleep--but an intruder came, now, that would not "down." It was
conscience. They began to feel a vague fear that they had been doing
wrong to run away; and next they thought of the stolen meat, and then
the real torture came. They tried to argue it away by reminding
conscience that they had purloined sweetmeats and apples scores of
times; but conscience was not to be appeased by such thin
plausibilities; it seemed to them, in the end, that there was no
getting around the stubborn fact that taking sweetmeats was only
"hooking," while taking bacon and hams and such valuables was plain
simple stealing--and there was a command against that in the Bible. So
they inwardly resolved that so long as they remained in the business,
their piracies should not again be sullied with the crime of stealing.
Then conscience granted a truce, and these curiously inconsistent
pirates fell peacefully to sleep.

CHAPTER XIV

WHEN Tom awoke in the morning, he wondered where he was. He sat up and
rubbed his eyes and looked around. Then he comprehended. It was the
cool gray dawn, and there was a delicious sense of repose and peace in
the deep pervading calm and silence of the woods. Not a leaf stirred;
not a sound obtruded upon great Nature's meditation. Beaded dewdrops
stood upon the leaves and grasses. A white layer of ashes covered the
fire, and a thin blue breath of smoke rose straight into the air. Joe
and Huck still slept.

Now, far away in the woods a bird called; another answered; presently
the hammering of a woodpecker was heard. Gradually the cool dim gray of
the morning whitened, and as gradually sounds multiplied and life
manifested itself. The marvel of Nature shaking off sleep and going to
work unfolded itself to the musing boy. A little green worm came
crawling over a dewy leaf, lifting two-thirds of his body into the air
from time to time and "sniffing around," then proceeding again--for he
was measuring, Tom said; and when the worm approached him, of its own
accord, he sat as still as a stone, with his hopes rising and falling,
by turns, as the creature still came toward him or seemed inclined to
go elsewhere; and when at last it considered a painful moment with its
curved body in the air and then came decisively down upon Tom's leg and
began a journey over him, his whole heart was glad--for that meant that
he was going to have a new suit of clothes--without the shadow of a
doubt a gaudy piratical uniform. Now a procession of ants appeared,
from nowhere in particular, and went about their labors; one struggled
manfully by with a dead spider five times as big as itself in its arms,
and lugged it straight up a tree-trunk. A brown spotted lady-bug
climbed the dizzy height of a grass blade, and Tom bent down close to
it and said, "Lady-bug, lady-bug, fly away home, your house is on fire,
your children's alone," and she took wing and went off to see about it
--which did not surprise the boy, for he knew of old that this insect was
credulous about conflagrations, and he had practised upon its
simplicity more than once. A tumblebug came next, heaving sturdily at
its ball, and Tom touched the creature, to see it shut its legs against
its body and pretend to be dead. The birds were fairly rioting by this
time. A catbird, the Northern mocker, lit in a tree over Tom's head,
and trilled out her imitations of her neighbors in a rapture of
enjoyment; then a shrill jay swept down, a flash of blue flame, and
stopped on a twig almost within the boy's reach, cocked his head to one
side and eyed the strangers with a consuming curiosity; a gray squirrel
and a big fellow of the "fox" kind came skurrying along, sitting up at
intervals to inspect and chatter at the boys, for the wild things had
probably never seen a human being before and scarcely knew whether to
be afraid or not. All Nature was wide awake and stirring, now; long
lances of sunlight pierced down through the dense foliage far and near,
and a few butterflies came fluttering upon the scene.

Tom stirred up the other pirates and they all clattered away with a
shout, and in a minute or two were stripped and chasing after and
tumbling over each other in the shallow limpid water of the white
sandbar. They felt no longing for the little village sleeping in the
distance beyond the majestic waste of water. A vagrant current or a
slight rise in the river had carried off their raft, but this only
gratified them, since its going was something like burning the bridge
between them and civilization.

They came back to camp wonderfully refreshed, glad-hearted, and
ravenous; and they soon had the camp-fire blazing up again. Huck found
a spring of clear cold water close by, and the boys made cups of broad
oak or hickory leaves, and felt that water, sweetened with such a
wildwood charm as that, would be a good enough substitute for coffee.
While Joe was slicing bacon for breakfast, Tom and Huck asked him to
hold on a minute; they stepped to a promising nook in the river-bank
and threw in their lines; almost immediately they had reward. Joe had
not had time to get impatient before they were back again with some
handsome bass, a couple of sun-perch and a small catfish--provisions
enough for quite a family. They fried the fish with the bacon, and were
astonished; for no fish had ever seemed so delicious before. They did
not know that the quicker a fresh-water fish is on the fire after he is
caught the better he is; and they reflected little upon what a sauce
open-air sleeping, open-air exercise, bathing, and a large ingredient
of hunger make, too.

They lay around in the shade, after breakfast, while Huck had a smoke,
and then went off through the woods on an exploring expedition. They
tramped gayly along, over decaying logs, through tangled underbrush,
among solemn monarchs of the forest, hung from their crowns to the
ground with a drooping regalia of grape-vines. Now and then they came
upon snug nooks carpeted with grass and jeweled with flowers.

They found plenty of things to be delighted with, but nothing to be
astonished at. They discovered that the island was about three miles
long and a quarter of a mile wide, and that the shore it lay closest to
was only separated from it by a narrow channel hardly two hundred yards
wide. They took a swim about every hour, so it was close upon the
middle of the afternoon when they got back to camp. They were too
hungry to stop to fish, but they fared sumptuously upon cold ham, and
then threw themselves down in the shade to talk. But the talk soon
began to drag, and then died. The stillness, the solemnity that brooded
in the woods, and the sense of loneliness, began to tell upon the
spirits of the boys. They fell to thinking. A sort of undefined longing
crept upon them. This took dim shape, presently--it was budding
homesickness. Even Finn the Red-Handed was dreaming of his doorsteps
and empty hogsheads. But they were all ashamed of their weakness, and
none was brave enough to speak his thought.

For some time, now, the boys had been dully conscious of a peculiar
sound in the distance, just as one sometimes is of the ticking of a
clock which he takes no distinct note of. But now this mysterious sound
became more pronounced, and forced a recognition. The boys started,
glanced at each other, and then each assumed a listening attitude.
There was a long silence, profound and unbroken; then a deep, sullen
boom came floating down out of the distance.

"What is it!" exclaimed Joe, under his breath.

"I wonder," said Tom in a whisper.

"'Tain't thunder," said Huckleberry, in an awed tone, "becuz thunder--"

"Hark!" said Tom. "Listen--don't talk."

They waited a time that seemed an age, and then the same muffled boom
troubled the solemn hush.

"Let's go and see."

They sprang to their feet and hurried to the shore toward the town.
They parted the bushes on the bank and peered out over the water. The
little steam ferryboat was about a mile below the village, drifting
with the current. Her broad deck seemed crowded with people. There were
a great many skiffs rowing about or floating with the stream in the
neighborhood of the ferryboat, but the boys could not determine what
the men in them were doing. Presently a great jet of white smoke burst
from the ferryboat's side, and as it expanded and rose in a lazy cloud,
that same dull throb of sound was borne to the listeners again.

"I know now!" exclaimed Tom; "somebody's drownded!"

"That's it!" said Huck; "they done that last summer, when Bill Turner
got drownded; they shoot a cannon over the water, and that makes him
come up to the top. Yes, and they take loaves of bread and put
quicksilver in 'em and set 'em afloat, and wherever there's anybody
that's drownded, they'll float right there and stop."

"Yes, I've heard about that," said Joe. "I wonder what makes the bread
do that."

"Oh, it ain't the bread, so much," said Tom; "I reckon it's mostly
what they SAY over it before they start it out."

"But they don't say anything over it," said Huck. "I've seen 'em and
they don't."

"Well, that's funny," said Tom. "But maybe they say it to themselves.
Of COURSE they do. Anybody might know that."

The other boys agreed that there was reason in what Tom said, because
an ignorant lump of bread, uninstructed by an incantation, could not be
expected to act very intelligently when set upon an errand of such
gravity.

"By jings, I wish I was over there, now," said Joe.

"I do too" said Huck "I'd give heaps to know who it is."

The boys still listened and watched. Presently a revealing thought
flashed through Tom's mind, and he exclaimed:

"Boys, I know who's drownded--it's us!"

They felt like heroes in an instant. Here was a gorgeous triumph; they
were missed; they were mourned; hearts were breaking on their account;
tears were being shed; accusing memories of unkindness to these poor
lost lads were rising up, and unavailing regrets and remorse were being
indulged; and best of all, the departed were the talk of the whole
town, and the envy of all the boys, as far as this dazzling notoriety
was concerned. This was fine. It was worth while to be a pirate, after
all.

As twilight drew on, the ferryboat went back to her accustomed
business and the skiffs disappeared. The pirates returned to camp. They
were jubilant with vanity over their new grandeur and the illustrious
trouble they were making. They caught fish, cooked supper and ate it,
and then fell to guessing at what the village was thinking and saying
about them; and the pictures they drew of the public distress on their
account were gratifying to look upon--from their point of view. But
when the shadows of night closed them in, they gradually ceased to
talk, and sat gazing into the fire, with their minds evidently
wandering elsewhere. The excitement was gone, now, and Tom and Joe
could not keep back thoughts of certain persons at home who were not
enjoying this fine frolic as much as they were. Misgivings came; they
grew troubled and unhappy; a sigh or two escaped, unawares. By and by
Joe timidly ventured upon a roundabout "feeler" as to how the others
might look upon a return to civilization--not right now, but--

Tom withered him with derision! Huck, being uncommitted as yet, joined
in with Tom, and the waverer quickly "explained," and was glad to get
out of the scrape with as little taint of chicken-hearted homesickness
clinging to his garments as he could. Mutiny was effectually laid to
rest for the moment.

As the night deepened, Huck began to nod, and presently to snore. Joe
followed next. Tom lay upon his elbow motionless, for some time,
watching the two intently. At last he got up cautiously, on his knees,
and went searching among the grass and the flickering reflections flung
by the camp-fire. He picked up and inspected several large
semi-cylinders of the thin white bark of a sycamore, and finally chose
two which seemed to suit him. Then he knelt by the fire and painfully
wrote something upon each of these with his "red keel"; one he rolled up
and put in his jacket pocket, and the other he put in Joe's hat and
removed it to a little distance from the owner. And he also put into the
hat certain schoolboy treasures of almost inestimable value--among them
a lump of chalk, an India-rubber ball, three fishhooks, and one of that
kind of marbles known as a "sure 'nough crystal." Then he tiptoed his
way cautiously among the trees till he felt that he was out of hearing,
and straightway broke into a keen run in the direction of the sandbar.

CHAPTER XV

A FEW minutes later Tom was in the shoal water of the bar, wading
toward the Illinois shore. Before the depth reached his middle he was
half-way over; the current would permit no more wading, now, so he
struck out confidently to swim the remaining hundred yards. He swam
quartering upstream, but still was swept downward rather faster than he
had expected. However, he reached the shore finally, and drifted along
till he found a low place and drew himself out. He put his hand on his
jacket pocket, found his piece of bark safe, and then struck through
the woods, following the shore, with streaming garments. Shortly before
ten o'clock he came out into an open place opposite the village, and
saw the ferryboat lying in the shadow of the trees and the high bank.
Everything was quiet under the blinking stars. He crept down the bank,
watching with all his eyes, slipped into the water, swam three or four
strokes and climbed into the skiff that did "yawl" duty at the boat's
stern. He laid himself down under the thwarts and waited, panting.

Presently the cracked bell tapped and a voice gave the order to "cast
off." A minute or two later the skiff's head was standing high up,
against the boat's swell, and the voyage was begun. Tom felt happy in
his success, for he knew it was the boat's last trip for the night. At
the end of a long twelve or fifteen minutes the wheels stopped, and Tom
slipped overboard and swam ashore in the dusk, landing fifty yards
downstream, out of danger of possible stragglers.

He flew along unfrequented alleys, and shortly found himself at his
aunt's back fence. He climbed over, approached the "ell," and looked in
at the sitting-room window, for a light was burning there. There sat
Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, and Joe Harper's mother, grouped together,
talking. They were by the bed, and the bed was between them and the
door. Tom went to the door and began to softly lift the latch; then he
pressed gently and the door yielded a crack; he continued pushing
cautiously, and quaking every time it creaked, till he judged he might
squeeze through on his knees; so he put his head through and began,
warily.

"What makes the candle blow so?" said Aunt Polly. Tom hurried up.
"Why, that door's open, I believe. Why, of course it is. No end of
strange things now. Go 'long and shut it, Sid."

Tom disappeared under the bed just in time. He lay and "breathed"
himself for a time, and then crept to where he could almost touch his
aunt's foot.

"But as I was saying," said Aunt Polly, "he warn't BAD, so to say
--only mischEEvous. Only just giddy, and harum-scarum, you know. He
warn't any more responsible than a colt. HE never meant any harm, and
he was the best-hearted boy that ever was"--and she began to cry.

"It was just so with my Joe--always full of his devilment, and up to
every kind of mischief, but he was just as unselfish and kind as he
could be--and laws bless me, to think I went and whipped him for taking
that cream, never once recollecting that I throwed it out myself
because it was sour, and I never to see him again in this world, never,
never, never, poor abused boy!" And Mrs. Harper sobbed as if her heart
would break.

"I hope Tom's better off where he is," said Sid, "but if he'd been
better in some ways--"

"SID!" Tom felt the glare of the old lady's eye, though he could not
see it. "Not a word against my Tom, now that he's gone! God'll take
care of HIM--never you trouble YOURself, sir! Oh, Mrs. Harper, I don't
know how to give him up! I don't know how to give him up! He was such a
comfort to me, although he tormented my old heart out of me, 'most."

"The Lord giveth and the Lord hath taken away--Blessed be the name of
the Lord! But it's so hard--Oh, it's so hard! Only last Saturday my
Joe busted a firecracker right under my nose and I knocked him
sprawling. Little did I know then, how soon--Oh, if it was to do over
again I'd hug him and bless him for it."

"Yes, yes, yes, I know just how you feel, Mrs. Harper, I know just
exactly how you feel. No longer ago than yesterday noon, my Tom took
and filled the cat full of Pain-killer, and I did think the cretur
would tear the house down. And God forgive me, I cracked Tom's head
with my thimble, poor boy, poor dead boy. But he's out of all his
troubles now. And the last words I ever heard him say was to reproach--"

But this memory was too much for the old lady, and she broke entirely
down. Tom was snuffling, now, himself--and more in pity of himself than
anybody else. He could hear Mary crying, and putting in a kindly word
for him from time to time. He began to have a nobler opinion of himself
than ever before. Still, he was sufficiently touched by his aunt's
grief to long to rush out from under the bed and overwhelm her with
joy--and the theatrical gorgeousness of the thing appealed strongly to
his nature, too, but he resisted and lay still.

He went on listening, and gathered by odds and ends that it was
conjectured at first that the boys had got drowned while taking a swim;
then the small raft had been missed; next, certain boys said the
missing lads had promised that the village should "hear something"
soon; the wise-heads had "put this and that together" and decided that
the lads had gone off on that raft and would turn up at the next town
below, presently; but toward noon the raft had been found, lodged
against the Missouri shore some five or six miles below the village
--and then hope perished; they must be drowned, else hunger would have
driven them home by nightfall if not sooner. It was believed that the
search for the bodies had been a fruitless effort merely because the
drowning must have occurred in mid-channel, since the boys, being good
swimmers, would otherwise have escaped to shore. This was Wednesday
night. If the bodies continued missing until Sunday, all hope would be
given over, and the funerals would be preached on that morning. Tom
shuddered.

Mrs. Harper gave a sobbing good-night and turned to go. Then with a
mutual impulse the two bereaved women flung themselves into each
other's arms and had a good, consoling cry, and then parted. Aunt Polly
was tender far beyond her wont, in her good-night to Sid and Mary. Sid
snuffled a bit and Mary went off crying with all her heart.

Aunt Polly knelt down and prayed for Tom so touchingly, so
appealingly, and with such measureless love in her words and her old
trembling voice, that he was weltering in tears again, long before she
was through.

He had to keep still long after she went to bed, for she kept making
broken-hearted ejaculations from time to time, tossing unrestfully, and
turning over. But at last she was still, only moaning a little in her
sleep. Now the boy stole out, rose gradually by the bedside, shaded the
candle-light with his hand, and stood regarding her. His heart was full
of pity for her. He took out his sycamore scroll and placed it by the
candle. But something occurred to him, and he lingered considering. His
face lighted with a happy solution of his thought; he put the bark
hastily in his pocket. Then he bent over and kissed the faded lips, and
straightway made his stealthy exit, latching the door behind him.

He threaded his way back to the ferry landing, found nobody at large
there, and walked boldly on board the boat, for he knew she was
tenantless except that there was a watchman, who always turned in and
slept like a graven image. He untied the skiff at the stern, slipped
into it, and was soon rowing cautiously upstream. When he had pulled a
mile above the village, he started quartering across and bent himself
stoutly to his work. He hit the landing on the other side neatly, for
this was a familiar bit of work to him. He was moved to capture the
skiff, arguing that it might be considered a ship and therefore
legitimate prey for a pirate, but he knew a thorough search would be
made for it and that might end in revelations. So he stepped ashore and
entered the woods.

He sat down and took a long rest, torturing himself meanwhile to keep
awake, and then started warily down the home-stretch. The night was far
spent. It was broad daylight before he found himself fairly abreast the
island bar. He rested again until the sun was well up and gilding the
great river with its splendor, and then he plunged into the stream. A
little later he paused, dripping, upon the threshold of the camp, and
heard Joe say:

"No, Tom's true-blue, Huck, and he'll come back. He won't desert. He
knows that would be a disgrace to a pirate, and Tom's too proud for
that sort of thing. He's up to something or other. Now I wonder what?"

"Well, the things is ours, anyway, ain't they?"

"Pretty near, but not yet, Huck. The writing says they are if he ain't
back here to breakfast."

"Which he is!" exclaimed Tom, with fine dramatic effect, stepping
grandly into camp.

A sumptuous breakfast of bacon and fish was shortly provided, and as
the boys set to work upon it, Tom recounted (and adorned) his
adventures. They were a vain and boastful company of heroes when the
tale was done. Then Tom hid himself away in a shady nook to sleep till
noon, and the other pirates got ready to fish and explore.

CHAPTER XVI

AFTER dinner all the gang turned out to hunt for turtle eggs on the
bar. They went about poking sticks into the sand, and when they found a
soft place they went down on their knees and dug with their hands.
Sometimes they would take fifty or sixty eggs out of one hole. They
were perfectly round white things a trifle smaller than an English
walnut. They had a famous fried-egg feast that night, and another on
Friday morning.

After breakfast they went whooping and prancing out on the bar, and
chased each other round and round, shedding clothes as they went, until
they were naked, and then continued the frolic far away up the shoal
water of the bar, against the stiff current, which latter tripped their
legs from under them from time to time and greatly increased the fun.
And now and then they stooped in a group and splashed water in each
other's faces with their palms, gradually approaching each other, with
averted faces to avoid the strangling sprays, and finally gripping and
struggling till the best man ducked his neighbor, and then they all
went under in a tangle of white legs and arms and came up blowing,
sputtering, laughing, and gasping for breath at one and the same time.

When they were well exhausted, they would run out and sprawl on the
dry, hot sand, and lie there and cover themselves up with it, and by
and by break for the water again and go through the original
performance once more. Finally it occurred to them that their naked
skin represented flesh-colored "tights" very fairly; so they drew a
ring in the sand and had a circus--with three clowns in it, for none
would yield this proudest post to his neighbor.

Next they got their marbles and played "knucks" and "ring-taw" and
"keeps" till that amusement grew stale. Then Joe and Huck had another
swim, but Tom would not venture, because he found that in kicking off
his trousers he had kicked his string of rattlesnake rattles off his
ankle, and he wondered how he had escaped cramp so long without the
protection of this mysterious charm. He did not venture again until he
had found it, and by that time the other boys were tired and ready to
rest. They gradually wandered apart, dropped into the "dumps," and fell
to gazing longingly across the wide river to where the village lay
drowsing in the sun. Tom found himself writing "BECKY" in the sand with
his big toe; he scratched it out, and was angry with himself for his
weakness. But he wrote it again, nevertheless; he could not help it. He
erased it once more and then took himself out of temptation by driving
the other boys together and joining them.

But Joe's spirits had gone down almost beyond resurrection. He was so
homesick that he could hardly endure the misery of it. The tears lay
very near the surface. Huck was melancholy, too. Tom was downhearted,
but tried hard not to show it. He had a secret which he was not ready
to tell, yet, but if this mutinous depression was not broken up soon,
he would have to bring it out. He said, with a great show of
cheerfulness:

"I bet there's been pirates on this island before, boys. We'll explore
it again. They've hid treasures here somewhere. How'd you feel to light
on a rotten chest full of gold and silver--hey?"

But it roused only faint enthusiasm, which faded out, with no reply.
Tom tried one or two other seductions; but they failed, too. It was
discouraging work. Joe sat poking up the sand with a stick and looking
very gloomy. Finally he said:

"Oh, boys, let's give it up. I want to go home. It's so lonesome."

"Oh no, Joe, you'll feel better by and by," said Tom. "Just think of
the fishing that's here."

"I don't care for fishing. I want to go home."

"But, Joe, there ain't such another swimming-place anywhere."

"Swimming's no good. I don't seem to care for it, somehow, when there
ain't anybody to say I sha'n't go in. I mean to go home."

"Oh, shucks! Baby! You want to see your mother, I reckon."

"Yes, I DO want to see my mother--and you would, too, if you had one.
I ain't any more baby than you are." And Joe snuffled a little.

"Well, we'll let the cry-baby go home to his mother, won't we, Huck?
Poor thing--does it want to see its mother? And so it shall. You like
it here, don't you, Huck? We'll stay, won't we?"

Huck said, "Y-e-s"--without any heart in it.

"I'll never speak to you again as long as I live," said Joe, rising.
"There now!" And he moved moodily away and began to dress himself.

"Who cares!" said Tom. "Nobody wants you to. Go 'long home and get
laughed at. Oh, you're a nice pirate. Huck and me ain't cry-babies.
We'll stay, won't we, Huck? Let him go if he wants to. I reckon we can
get along without him, per'aps."

But Tom was uneasy, nevertheless, and was alarmed to see Joe go
sullenly on with his dressing. And then it was discomforting to see
Huck eying Joe's preparations so wistfully, and keeping up such an
ominous silence. Presently, without a parting word, Joe began to wade
off toward the Illinois shore. Tom's heart began to sink. He glanced at
Huck. Huck could not bear the look, and dropped his eyes. Then he said:

"I want to go, too, Tom. It was getting so lonesome anyway, and now
it'll be worse. Let's us go, too, Tom."

"I won't! You can all go, if you want to. I mean to stay."

"Tom, I better go."

"Well, go 'long--who's hendering you."

Huck began to pick up his scattered clothes. He said:

"Tom, I wisht you'd come, too. Now you think it over. We'll wait for
you when we get to shore."

"Well, you'll wait a blame long time, that's all."

Huck started sorrowfully away, and Tom stood looking after him, with a
strong desire tugging at his heart to yield his pride and go along too.
He hoped the boys would stop, but they still waded slowly on. It
suddenly dawned on Tom that it was become very lonely and still. He
made one final struggle with his pride, and then darted after his
comrades, yelling:

"Wait! Wait! I want to tell you something!"

They presently stopped and turned around. When he got to where they
were, he began unfolding his secret, and they listened moodily till at
last they saw the "point" he was driving at, and then they set up a
war-whoop of applause and said it was "splendid!" and said if he had
told them at first, they wouldn't have started away. He made a plausible
excuse; but his real reason had been the fear that not even the secret
would keep them with him any very great length of time, and so he had
meant to hold it in reserve as a last seduction.

The lads came gayly back and went at their sports again with a will,
chattering all the time about Tom's stupendous plan and admiring the
genius of it. After a dainty egg and fish dinner, Tom said he wanted to
learn to smoke, now. Joe caught at the idea and said he would like to
try, too. So Huck made pipes and filled them. These novices had never
smoked anything before but cigars made of grape-vine, and they "bit"
the tongue, and were not considered manly anyway.

Now they stretched themselves out on their elbows and began to puff,
charily, and with slender confidence. The smoke had an unpleasant
taste, and they gagged a little, but Tom said:

"Why, it's just as easy! If I'd a knowed this was all, I'd a learnt
long ago."

"So would I," said Joe. "It's just nothing."

"Why, many a time I've looked at people smoking, and thought well I
wish I could do that; but I never thought I could," said Tom.

"That's just the way with me, hain't it, Huck? You've heard me talk
just that way--haven't you, Huck? I'll leave it to Huck if I haven't."

"Yes--heaps of times," said Huck.

"Well, I have too," said Tom; "oh, hundreds of times. Once down by the
slaughter-house. Don't you remember, Huck? Bob Tanner was there, and
Johnny Miller, and Jeff Thatcher, when I said it. Don't you remember,
Huck, 'bout me saying that?"

"Yes, that's so," said Huck. "That was the day after I lost a white
alley. No, 'twas the day before."

"There--I told you so," said Tom. "Huck recollects it."

"I bleeve I could smoke this pipe all day," said Joe. "I don't feel
sick."

"Neither do I," said Tom. "I could smoke it all day. But I bet you
Jeff Thatcher couldn't."

"Jeff Thatcher! Why, he'd keel over just with two draws. Just let him
try it once. HE'D see!"

"I bet he would. And Johnny Miller--I wish could see Johnny Miller
tackle it once."

"Oh, don't I!" said Joe. "Why, I bet you Johnny Miller couldn't any
more do this than nothing. Just one little snifter would fetch HIM."

"'Deed it would, Joe. Say--I wish the boys could see us now."

"So do I."

"Say--boys, don't say anything about it, and some time when they're
around, I'll come up to you and say, 'Joe, got a pipe? I want a smoke.'
And you'll say, kind of careless like, as if it warn't anything, you'll
say, 'Yes, I got my OLD pipe, and another one, but my tobacker ain't
very good.' And I'll say, 'Oh, that's all right, if it's STRONG
enough.' And then you'll out with the pipes, and we'll light up just as
ca'm, and then just see 'em look!"

"By jings, that'll be gay, Tom! I wish it was NOW!"

"So do I! And when we tell 'em we learned when we was off pirating,
won't they wish they'd been along?"

"Oh, I reckon not! I'll just BET they will!"

So the talk ran on. But presently it began to flag a trifle, and grow
disjointed. The silences widened; the expectoration marvellously
increased. Every pore inside the boys' cheeks became a spouting
fountain; they could scarcely bail out the cellars under their tongues
fast enough to prevent an inundation; little overflowings down their
throats occurred in spite of all they could do, and sudden retchings
followed every time. Both boys were looking very pale and miserable,
now. Joe's pipe dropped from his nerveless fingers. Tom's followed.
Both fountains were going furiously and both pumps bailing with might
and main. Joe said feebly:

"I've lost my knife. I reckon I better go and find it."

Tom said, with quivering lips and halting utterance:

"I'll help you. You go over that way and I'll hunt around by the
spring. No, you needn't come, Huck--we can find it."

So Huck sat down again, and waited an hour. Then he found it lonesome,
and went to find his comrades. They were wide apart in the woods, both
very pale, both fast asleep. But something informed him that if they
had had any trouble they had got rid of it.

They were not talkative at supper that night. They had a humble look,
and when Huck prepared his pipe after the meal and was going to prepare
theirs, they said no, they were not feeling very well--something they
ate at dinner had disagreed with them.

About midnight Joe awoke, and called the boys. There was a brooding
oppressiveness in the air that seemed to bode something. The boys
huddled themselves together and sought the friendly companionship of
the fire, though the dull dead heat of the breathless atmosphere was
stifling. They sat still, intent and waiting. The solemn hush
continued. Beyond the light of the fire everything was swallowed up in
the blackness of darkness. Presently there came a quivering glow that
vaguely revealed the foliage for a moment and then vanished. By and by
another came, a little stronger. Then another. Then a faint moan came
sighing through the branches of the forest and the boys felt a fleeting
breath upon their cheeks, and shuddered with the fancy that the Spirit
of the Night had gone by. There was a pause. Now a weird flash turned
night into day and showed every little grass-blade, separate and
distinct, that grew about their feet. And it showed three white,
startled faces, too. A deep peal of thunder went rolling and tumbling
down the heavens and lost itself in sullen rumblings in the distance. A
sweep of chilly air passed by, rustling all the leaves and snowing the
flaky ashes broadcast about the fire. Another fierce glare lit up the
forest and an instant crash followed that seemed to rend the tree-tops
right over the boys' heads. They clung together in terror, in the thick
gloom that followed. A few big rain-drops fell pattering upon the
leaves.

"Quick! boys, go for the tent!" exclaimed Tom.

They sprang away, stumbling over roots and among vines in the dark, no
two plunging in the same direction. A furious blast roared through the
trees, making everything sing as it went. One blinding flash after
another came, and peal on peal of deafening thunder. And now a
drenching rain poured down and the rising hurricane drove it in sheets
along the ground. The boys cried out to each other, but the roaring
wind and the booming thunder-blasts drowned their voices utterly.
However, one by one they straggled in at last and took shelter under
the tent, cold, scared, and streaming with water; but to have company
in misery seemed something to be grateful for. They could not talk, the
old sail flapped so furiously, even if the other noises would have
allowed them. The tempest rose higher and higher, and presently the
sail tore loose from its fastenings and went winging away on the blast.
The boys seized each others' hands and fled, with many tumblings and
bruises, to the shelter of a great oak that stood upon the river-bank.
Now the battle was at its highest. Under the ceaseless conflagration of
lightning that flamed in the skies, everything below stood out in
clean-cut and shadowless distinctness: the bending trees, the billowy
river, white with foam, the driving spray of spume-flakes, the dim
outlines of the high bluffs on the other side, glimpsed through the
drifting cloud-rack and the slanting veil of rain. Every little while
some giant tree yielded the fight and fell crashing through the younger
growth; and the unflagging thunder-peals came now in ear-splitting
explosive bursts, keen and sharp, and unspeakably appalling. The storm
culminated in one matchless effort that seemed likely to tear the island
to pieces, burn it up, drown it to the tree-tops, blow it away, and
deafen every creature in it, all at one and the same moment. It was a
wild night for homeless young heads to be out in.

But at last the battle was done, and the forces retired with weaker
and weaker threatenings and grumblings, and peace resumed her sway. The
boys went back to camp, a good deal awed; but they found there was
still something to be thankful for, because the great sycamore, the
shelter of their beds, was a ruin, now, blasted by the lightnings, and
they were not under it when the catastrophe happened.

Everything in camp was drenched, the camp-fire as well; for they were
but heedless lads, like their generation, and had made no provision
against rain. Here was matter for dismay, for they were soaked through
and chilled. They were eloquent in their distress; but they presently
discovered that the fire had eaten so far up under the great log it had
been built against (where it curved upward and separated itself from
the ground), that a handbreadth or so of it had escaped wetting; so
they patiently wrought until, with shreds and bark gathered from the
under sides of sheltered logs, they coaxed the fire to burn again. Then
they piled on great dead boughs till they had a roaring furnace, and
were glad-hearted once more. They dried their boiled ham and had a
feast, and after that they sat by the fire and expanded and glorified
their midnight adventure until morning, for there was not a dry spot to
sleep on, anywhere around.

As the sun began to steal in upon the boys, drowsiness came over them,
and they went out on the sandbar and lay down to sleep. They got
scorched out by and by, and drearily set about getting breakfast. After
the meal they felt rusty, and stiff-jointed, and a little homesick once
more. Tom saw the signs, and fell to cheering up the pirates as well as
he could. But they cared nothing for marbles, or circus, or swimming,
or anything. He reminded them of the imposing secret, and raised a ray
of cheer. While it lasted, he got them interested in a new device. This
was to knock off being pirates, for a while, and be Indians for a
change. They were attracted by this idea; so it was not long before
they were stripped, and striped from head to heel with black mud, like
so many zebras--all of them chiefs, of course--and then they went
tearing through the woods to attack an English settlement.

By and by they separated into three hostile tribes, and darted upon
each other from ambush with dreadful war-whoops, and killed and scalped
each other by thousands. It was a gory day. Consequently it was an
extremely satisfactory one.

They assembled in camp toward supper-time, hungry and happy; but now a
difficulty arose--hostile Indians could not break the bread of
hospitality together without first making peace, and this was a simple
impossibility without smoking a pipe of peace. There was no other
process that ever they had heard of. Two of the savages almost wished
they had remained pirates. However, there was no other way; so with
such show of cheerfulness as they could muster they called for the pipe
and took their whiff as it passed, in due form.

And behold, they were glad they had gone into savagery, for they had
gained something; they found that they could now smoke a little without
having to go and hunt for a lost knife; they did not get sick enough to
be seriously uncomfortable. They were not likely to fool away this high
promise for lack of effort. No, they practised cautiously, after
supper, with right fair success, and so they spent a jubilant evening.
They were prouder and happier in their new acquirement than they would
have been in the scalping and skinning of the Six Nations. We will
leave them to smoke and chatter and brag, since we have no further use
for them at present.

CHAPTER XVII

BUT there was no hilarity in the little town that same tranquil
Saturday afternoon. The Harpers, and Aunt Polly's family, were being
put into mourning, with great grief and many tears. An unusual quiet
possessed the village, although it was ordinarily quiet enough, in all
conscience. The villagers conducted their concerns with an absent air,
and talked little; but they sighed often. The Saturday holiday seemed a
burden to the children. They had no heart in their sports, and
gradually gave them up.

In the afternoon Becky Thatcher found herself moping about the
deserted schoolhouse yard, and feeling very melancholy. But she found
nothing there to comfort her. She soliloquized:

"Oh, if I only had a brass andiron-knob again! But I haven't got
anything now to remember him by." And she choked back a little sob.

Presently she stopped, and said to herself:

"It was right here. Oh, if it was to do over again, I wouldn't say
that--I wouldn't say it for the whole world. But he's gone now; I'll
never, never, never see him any more."

This thought broke her down, and she wandered away, with tears rolling
down her cheeks. Then quite a group of boys and girls--playmates of
Tom's and Joe's--came by, and stood looking over the paling fence and
talking in reverent tones of how Tom did so-and-so the last time they
saw him, and how Joe said this and that small trifle (pregnant with
awful prophecy, as they could easily see now!)--and each speaker
pointed out the exact spot where the lost lads stood at the time, and
then added something like "and I was a-standing just so--just as I am
now, and as if you was him--I was as close as that--and he smiled, just
this way--and then something seemed to go all over me, like--awful, you
know--and I never thought what it meant, of course, but I can see now!"

Then there was a dispute about who saw the dead boys last in life, and
many claimed that dismal distinction, and offered evidences, more or
less tampered with by the witness; and when it was ultimately decided
who DID see the departed last, and exchanged the last words with them,
the lucky parties took upon themselves a sort of sacred importance, and
were gaped at and envied by all the rest. One poor chap, who had no
other grandeur to offer, said with tolerably manifest pride in the
remembrance:

"Well, Tom Sawyer he licked me once."

But that bid for glory was a failure. Most of the boys could say that,
and so that cheapened the distinction too much. The group loitered
away, still recalling memories of the lost heroes, in awed voices.

When the Sunday-school hour was finished, the next morning, the bell
began to toll, instead of ringing in the usual way. It was a very still
Sabbath, and the mournful sound seemed in keeping with the musing hush
that lay upon nature. The villagers began to gather, loitering a moment
in the vestibule to converse in whispers about the sad event. But there
was no whispering in the house; only the funereal rustling of dresses
as the women gathered to their seats disturbed the silence there. None
could remember when the little church had been so full before. There
was finally a waiting pause, an expectant dumbness, and then Aunt Polly
entered, followed by Sid and Mary, and they by the Harper family, all
in deep black, and the whole congregation, the old minister as well,
rose reverently and stood until the mourners were seated in the front
pew. There was another communing silence, broken at intervals by
muffled sobs, and then the minister spread his hands abroad and prayed.
A moving hymn was sung, and the text followed: "I am the Resurrection
and the Life."

As the service proceeded, the clergyman drew such pictures of the
graces, the winning ways, and the rare promise of the lost lads that
every soul there, thinking he recognized these pictures, felt a pang in
remembering that he had persistently blinded himself to them always
before, and had as persistently seen only faults and flaws in the poor
boys. The minister related many a touching incident in the lives of the
departed, too, which illustrated their sweet, generous natures, and the
people could easily see, now, how noble and beautiful those episodes
were, and remembered with grief that at the time they occurred they had
seemed rank rascalities, well deserving of the cowhide. The
congregation became more and more moved, as the pathetic tale went on,
till at last the whole company broke down and joined the weeping
mourners in a chorus of anguished sobs, the preacher himself giving way
to his feelings, and crying in the pulpit.

There was a rustle in the gallery, which nobody noticed; a moment
later the church door creaked; the minister raised his streaming eyes
above his handkerchief, and stood transfixed! First one and then
another pair of eyes followed the minister's, and then almost with one
impulse the congregation rose and stared while the three dead boys came
marching up the aisle, Tom in the lead, Joe next, and Huck, a ruin of
drooping rags, sneaking sheepishly in the rear! They had been hid in
the unused gallery listening to their own funeral sermon!

Aunt Polly, Mary, and the Harpers threw themselves upon their restored
ones, smothered them with kisses and poured out thanksgivings, while
poor Huck stood abashed and uncomfortable, not knowing exactly what to
do or where to hide from so many unwelcoming eyes. He wavered, and
started to slink away, but Tom seized him and said:

"Aunt Polly, it ain't fair. Somebody's got to be glad to see Huck."

"And so they shall. I'm glad to see him, poor motherless thing!" And
the loving attentions Aunt Polly lavished upon him were the one thing
capable of making him more uncomfortable than he was before.

Suddenly the minister shouted at the top of his voice: "Praise God
from whom all blessings flow--SING!--and put your hearts in it!"

And they did. Old Hundred swelled up with a triumphant burst, and
while it shook the rafters Tom Sawyer the Pirate looked around upon the
envying juveniles about him and confessed in his heart that this was
the proudest moment of his life.

As the "sold" congregation trooped out they said they would almost be
willing to be made ridiculous again to hear Old Hundred sung like that
once more.

Tom got more cuffs and kisses that day--according to Aunt Polly's
varying moods--than he had earned before in a year; and he hardly knew
which expressed the most gratefulness to God and affection for himself.

CHAPTER XVIII

THAT was Tom's great secret--the scheme to return home with his
brother pirates and attend their own funerals. They had paddled over to
the Missouri shore on a log, at dusk on Saturday, landing five or six
miles below the village; they had slept in the woods at the edge of the
town till nearly daylight, and had then crept through back lanes and
alleys and finished their sleep in the gallery of the church among a
chaos of invalided benches.

At breakfast, Monday morning, Aunt Polly and Mary were very loving to
Tom, and very attentive to his wants. There was an unusual amount of
talk. In the course of it Aunt Polly said:

"Well, I don't say it wasn't a fine joke, Tom, to keep everybody
suffering 'most a week so you boys had a good time, but it is a pity
you could be so hard-hearted as to let me suffer so. If you could come
over on a log to go to your funeral, you could have come over and give
me a hint some way that you warn't dead, but only run off."

"Yes, you could have done that, Tom," said Mary; "and I believe you
would if you had thought of it."

"Would you, Tom?" said Aunt Polly, her face lighting wistfully. "Say,
now, would you, if you'd thought of it?"

"I--well, I don't know. 'Twould 'a' spoiled everything."

"Tom, I hoped you loved me that much," said Aunt Polly, with a grieved
tone that discomforted the boy. "It would have been something if you'd
cared enough to THINK of it, even if you didn't DO it."

"Now, auntie, that ain't any harm," pleaded Mary; "it's only Tom's
giddy way--he is always in such a rush that he never thinks of
anything."

"More's the pity. Sid would have thought. And Sid would have come and
DONE it, too. Tom, you'll look back, some day, when it's too late, and
wish you'd cared a little more for me when it would have cost you so
little."

"Now, auntie, you know I do care for you," said Tom.

"I'd know it better if you acted more like it."

"I wish now I'd thought," said Tom, with a repentant tone; "but I
dreamt about you, anyway. That's something, ain't it?"

"It ain't much--a cat does that much--but it's better than nothing.
What did you dream?"

"Why, Wednesday night I dreamt that you was sitting over there by the
bed, and Sid was sitting by the woodbox, and Mary next to him."

"Well, so we did. So we always do. I'm glad your dreams could take
even that much trouble about us."

"And I dreamt that Joe Harper's mother was here."

"Why, she was here! Did you dream any more?"

"Oh, lots. But it's so dim, now."

"Well, try to recollect--can't you?"

"Somehow it seems to me that the wind--the wind blowed the--the--"

"Try harder, Tom! The wind did blow something. Come!"

Tom pressed his fingers on his forehead an anxious minute, and then
said:

"I've got it now! I've got it now! It blowed the candle!"

"Mercy on us! Go on, Tom--go on!"

"And it seems to me that you said, 'Why, I believe that that door--'"

"Go ON, Tom!"

"Just let me study a moment--just a moment. Oh, yes--you said you
believed the door was open."

"As I'm sitting here, I did! Didn't I, Mary! Go on!"

"And then--and then--well I won't be certain, but it seems like as if
you made Sid go and--and--"

"Well? Well? What did I make him do, Tom? What did I make him do?"

"You made him--you--Oh, you made him shut it."

"Well, for the land's sake! I never heard the beat of that in all my
days! Don't tell ME there ain't anything in dreams, any more. Sereny
Harper shall know of this before I'm an hour older. I'd like to see her
get around THIS with her rubbage 'bout superstition. Go on, Tom!"

"Oh, it's all getting just as bright as day, now. Next you said I
warn't BAD, only mischeevous and harum-scarum, and not any more
responsible than--than--I think it was a colt, or something."

"And so it was! Well, goodness gracious! Go on, Tom!"

"And then you began to cry."

"So I did. So I did. Not the first time, neither. And then--"

"Then Mrs. Harper she began to cry, and said Joe was just the same,
and she wished she hadn't whipped him for taking cream when she'd
throwed it out her own self--"

"Tom! The sperrit was upon you! You was a prophesying--that's what you
was doing! Land alive, go on, Tom!"

"Then Sid he said--he said--"

"I don't think I said anything," said Sid.

"Yes you did, Sid," said Mary.

"Shut your heads and let Tom go on! What did he say, Tom?"

"He said--I THINK he said he hoped I was better off where I was gone
to, but if I'd been better sometimes--"

"THERE, d'you hear that! It was his very words!"

"And you shut him up sharp."

"I lay I did! There must 'a' been an angel there. There WAS an angel
there, somewheres!"

"And Mrs. Harper told about Joe scaring her with a firecracker, and
you told about Peter and the Painkiller--"

"Just as true as I live!"

"And then there was a whole lot of talk 'bout dragging the river for
us, and 'bout having the funeral Sunday, and then you and old Miss
Harper hugged and cried, and she went."

"It happened just so! It happened just so, as sure as I'm a-sitting in
these very tracks. Tom, you couldn't told it more like if you'd 'a'
seen it! And then what? Go on, Tom!"

"Then I thought you prayed for me--and I could see you and hear every
word you said. And you went to bed, and I was so sorry that I took and
wrote on a piece of sycamore bark, 'We ain't dead--we are only off
being pirates,' and put it on the table by the candle; and then you
looked so good, laying there asleep, that I thought I went and leaned
over and kissed you on the lips."

"Did you, Tom, DID you! I just forgive you everything for that!" And
she seized the boy in a crushing embrace that made him feel like the
guiltiest of villains.

"It was very kind, even though it was only a--dream," Sid soliloquized
just audibly.

"Shut up, Sid! A body does just the same in a dream as he'd do if he
was awake. Here's a big Milum apple I've been saving for you, Tom, if
you was ever found again--now go 'long to school. I'm thankful to the
good God and Father of us all I've got you back, that's long-suffering
and merciful to them that believe on Him and keep His word, though
goodness knows I'm unworthy of it, but if only the worthy ones got His
blessings and had His hand to help them over the rough places, there's
few enough would smile here or ever enter into His rest when the long
night comes. Go 'long Sid, Mary, Tom--take yourselves off--you've
hendered me long enough."

The children left for school, and the old lady to call on Mrs. Harper
and vanquish her realism with Tom's marvellous dream. Sid had better
judgment than to utter the thought that was in his mind as he left the
house. It was this: "Pretty thin--as long a dream as that, without any
mistakes in it!"

What a hero Tom was become, now! He did not go skipping and prancing,
but moved with a dignified swagger as became a pirate who felt that the
public eye was on him. And indeed it was; he tried not to seem to see
the looks or hear the remarks as he passed along, but they were food
and drink to him. Smaller boys than himself flocked at his heels, as
proud to be seen with him, and tolerated by him, as if he had been the
drummer at the head of a procession or the elephant leading a menagerie
into town. Boys of his own size pretended not to know he had been away
at all; but they were consuming with envy, nevertheless. They would
have given anything to have that swarthy suntanned skin of his, and his
glittering notoriety; and Tom would not have parted with either for a
circus.

At school the children made so much of him and of Joe, and delivered
such eloquent admiration from their eyes, that the two heroes were not
long in becoming insufferably "stuck-up." They began to tell their
adventures to hungry listeners--but they only began; it was not a thing
likely to have an end, with imaginations like theirs to furnish
material. And finally, when they got out their pipes and went serenely
puffing around, the very summit of glory was reached.

Tom decided that he could be independent of Becky Thatcher now. Glory
was sufficient. He would live for glory. Now that he was distinguished,
maybe she would be wanting to "make up." Well, let her--she should see
that he could be as indifferent as some other people. Presently she
arrived. Tom pretended not to see her. He moved away and joined a group
of boys and girls and began to talk. Soon he observed that she was
tripping gayly back and forth with flushed face and dancing eyes,
pretending to be busy chasing schoolmates, and screaming with laughter
when she made a capture; but he noticed that she always made her
captures in his vicinity, and that she seemed to cast a conscious eye
in his direction at such times, too. It gratified all the vicious
vanity that was in him; and so, instead of winning him, it only "set
him up" the more and made him the more diligent to avoid betraying that
he knew she was about. Presently she gave over skylarking, and moved
irresolutely about, sighing once or twice and glancing furtively and
wistfully toward Tom. Then she observed that now Tom was talking more
particularly to Amy Lawrence than to any one else. She felt a sharp
pang and grew disturbed and uneasy at once. She tried to go away, but
her feet were treacherous, and carried her to the group instead. She
said to a girl almost at Tom's elbow--with sham vivacity:

"Why, Mary Austin! you bad girl, why didn't you come to Sunday-school?"

"I did come--didn't you see me?"

"Why, no! Did you? Where did you sit?"

"I was in Miss Peters' class, where I always go. I saw YOU."

"Did you? Why, it's funny I didn't see you. I wanted to tell you about
the picnic."

"Oh, that's jolly. Who's going to give it?"

"My ma's going to let me have one."

"Oh, goody; I hope she'll let ME come."

"Well, she will. The picnic's for me. She'll let anybody come that I
want, and I want you."

"That's ever so nice. When is it going to be?"

"By and by. Maybe about vacation."

"Oh, won't it be fun! You going to have all the girls and boys?"

"Yes, every one that's friends to me--or wants to be"; and she glanced
ever so furtively at Tom, but he talked right along to Amy Lawrence
about the terrible storm on the island, and how the lightning tore the
great sycamore tree "all to flinders" while he was "standing within
three feet of it."

"Oh, may I come?" said Grace Miller.

"Yes."

"And me?" said Sally Rogers.

"Yes."

"And me, too?" said Susy Harper. "And Joe?"

"Yes."

And so on, with clapping of joyful hands till all the group had begged
for invitations but Tom and Amy. Then Tom turned coolly away, still
talking, and took Amy with him. Becky's lips trembled and the tears
came to her eyes; she hid these signs with a forced gayety and went on
chattering, but the life had gone out of the picnic, now, and out of
everything else; she got away as soon as she could and hid herself and
had what her sex call "a good cry." Then she sat moody, with wounded
pride, till the bell rang. She roused up, now, with a vindictive cast
in her eye, and gave her plaited tails a shake and said she knew what
SHE'D do.

At recess Tom continued his flirtation with Amy with jubilant
self-satisfaction. And he kept drifting about to find Becky and lacerate
her with the performance. At last he spied her, but there was a sudden
falling of his mercury. She was sitting cosily on a little bench behind
the schoolhouse looking at a picture-book with Alfred Temple--and so
absorbed were they, and their heads so close together over the book,
that they did not seem to be conscious of anything in the world besides.
Jealousy ran red-hot through Tom's veins. He began to hate himself for
throwing away the chance Becky had offered for a reconciliation. He
called himself a fool, and all the hard names he could think of. He
wanted to cry with vexation. Amy chatted happily along, as they walked,
for her heart was singing, but Tom's tongue had lost its function. He
did not hear what Amy was saying, and whenever she paused expectantly he
could only stammer an awkward assent, which was as often misplaced as
otherwise. He kept drifting to the rear of the schoolhouse, again and
again, to sear his eyeballs with the hateful spectacle there. He could
not help it. And it maddened him to see, as he thought he saw, that
Becky Thatcher never once suspected that he was even in the land of the
living. But she did see, nevertheless; and she knew she was winning her
fight, too, and was glad to see him suffer as she had suffered.

Amy's happy prattle became intolerable. Tom hinted at things he had to
attend to; things that must be done; and time was fleeting. But in
vain--the girl chirped on. Tom thought, "Oh, hang her, ain't I ever
going to get rid of her?" At last he must be attending to those
things--and she said artlessly that she would be "around" when school
let out. And he hastened away, hating her for it.

"Any other boy!" Tom thought, grating his teeth. "Any boy in the whole
town but that Saint Louis smarty that thinks he dresses so fine and is
aristocracy! Oh, all right, I licked you the first day you ever saw
this town, mister, and I'll lick you again! You just wait till I catch
you out! I'll just take and--"

And he went through the motions of thrashing an imaginary boy
--pummelling the air, and kicking and gouging. "Oh, you do, do you? You
holler 'nough, do you? Now, then, let that learn you!" And so the
imaginary flogging was finished to his satisfaction.

Tom fled home at noon. His conscience could not endure any more of
Amy's grateful happiness, and his jealousy could bear no more of the
other distress. Becky resumed her picture inspections with Alfred, but
as the minutes dragged along and no Tom came to suffer, her triumph
began to cloud and she lost interest; gravity and absent-mindedness
followed, and then melancholy; two or three times she pricked up her
ear at a footstep, but it was a false hope; no Tom came. At last she
grew entirely miserable and wished she hadn't carried it so far. When
poor Alfred, seeing that he was losing her, he did not know how, kept
exclaiming: "Oh, here's a jolly one! look at this!" she lost patience
at last, and said, "Oh, don't bother me! I don't care for them!" and
burst into tears, and got up and walked away.

Alfred dropped alongside and was going to try to comfort her, but she
said:

"Go away and leave me alone, can't you! I hate you!"

So the boy halted, wondering what he could have done--for she had said
she would look at pictures all through the nooning--and she walked on,
crying. Then Alfred went musing into the deserted schoolhouse. He was
humiliated and angry. He easily guessed his way to the truth--the girl
had simply made a convenience of him to vent her spite upon Tom Sawyer.
He was far from hating Tom the less when this thought occurred to him.
He wished there was some way to get that boy into trouble without much
risk to himself. Tom's spelling-book fell under his eye. Here was his
opportunity. He gratefully opened to the lesson for the afternoon and
poured ink upon the page.

Becky, glancing in at a window behind him at the moment, saw the act,
and moved on, without discovering herself. She started homeward, now,
intending to find Tom and tell him; Tom would be thankful and their
troubles would be healed. Before she was half way home, however, she
had changed her mind. The thought of Tom's treatment of her when she
was talking about her picnic came scorching back and filled her with
shame. She resolved to let him get whipped on the damaged
spelling-book's account, and to hate him forever, into the bargain.

CHAPTER XIX

TOM arrived at home in a dreary mood, and the first thing his aunt
said to him showed him that he had brought his sorrows to an
unpromising market:

"Tom, I've a notion to skin you alive!"

"Auntie, what have I done?"

"Well, you've done enough. Here I go over to Sereny Harper, like an
old softy, expecting I'm going to make her believe all that rubbage
about that dream, when lo and behold you she'd found out from Joe that
you was over here and heard all the talk we had that night. Tom, I
don't know what is to become of a boy that will act like that. It makes
me feel so bad to think you could let me go to Sereny Harper and make
such a fool of myself and never say a word."

This was a new aspect of the thing. His smartness of the morning had
seemed to Tom a good joke before, and very ingenious. It merely looked
mean and shabby now. He hung his head and could not think of anything
to say for a moment. Then he said:

"Auntie, I wish I hadn't done it--but I didn't think."

"Oh, child, you never think. You never think of anything but your own
selfishness. You could think to come all the way over here from
Jackson's Island in the night to laugh at our troubles, and you could
think to fool me with a lie about a dream; but you couldn't ever think
to pity us and save us from sorrow."

"Auntie, I know now it was mean, but I didn't mean to be mean. I
didn't, honest. And besides, I didn't come over here to laugh at you
that night."

"What did you come for, then?"

"It was to tell you not to be uneasy about us, because we hadn't got
drownded."

"Tom, Tom, I would be the thankfullest soul in this world if I could
believe you ever had as good a thought as that, but you know you never
did--and I know it, Tom."

"Indeed and 'deed I did, auntie--I wish I may never stir if I didn't."

"Oh, Tom, don't lie--don't do it. It only makes things a hundred times
worse."

"It ain't a lie, auntie; it's the truth. I wanted to keep you from
grieving--that was all that made me come."

"I'd give the whole world to believe that--it would cover up a power
of sins, Tom. I'd 'most be glad you'd run off and acted so bad. But it
ain't reasonable; because, why didn't you tell me, child?"

"Why, you see, when you got to talking about the funeral, I just got
all full of the idea of our coming and hiding in the church, and I
couldn't somehow bear to spoil it. So I just put the bark back in my
pocket and kept mum."

"What bark?"

"The bark I had wrote on to tell you we'd gone pirating. I wish, now,
you'd waked up when I kissed you--I do, honest."

The hard lines in his aunt's face relaxed and a sudden tenderness
dawned in her eyes.

"DID you kiss me, Tom?"

"Why, yes, I did."

"Are you sure you did, Tom?"

"Why, yes, I did, auntie--certain sure."

"What did you kiss me for, Tom?"

"Because I loved you so, and you laid there moaning and I was so sorry."

The words sounded like truth. The old lady could not hide a tremor in
her voice when she said:

"Kiss me again, Tom!--and be off with you to school, now, and don't
bother me any more."

The moment he was gone, she ran to a closet and got out the ruin of a
jacket which Tom had gone pirating in. Then she stopped, with it in her
hand, and said to herself:

"No, I don't dare. Poor boy, I reckon he's lied about it--but it's a
blessed, blessed lie, there's such a comfort come from it. I hope the
Lord--I KNOW the Lord will forgive him, because it was such
goodheartedness in him to tell it. But I don't want to find out it's a
lie. I won't look."

She put the jacket away, and stood by musing a minute. Twice she put
out her hand to take the garment again, and twice she refrained. Once
more she ventured, and this time she fortified herself with the
thought: "It's a good lie--it's a good lie--I won't let it grieve me."
So she sought the jacket pocket. A moment later she was reading Tom's
piece of bark through flowing tears and saying: "I could forgive the
boy, now, if he'd committed a million sins!"

CHAPTER XX

THERE was something about Aunt Polly's manner, when she kissed Tom,
that swept away his low spirits and made him lighthearted and happy
again. He started to school and had the luck of coming upon Becky
Thatcher at the head of Meadow Lane. His mood always determined his
manner. Without a moment's hesitation he ran to her and said:

"I acted mighty mean to-day, Becky, and I'm so sorry. I won't ever,
ever do that way again, as long as ever I live--please make up, won't
you?"

The girl stopped and looked him scornfully in the face:

"I'll thank you to keep yourself TO yourself, Mr. Thomas Sawyer. I'll
never speak to you again."

She tossed her head and passed on. Tom was so stunned that he had not
even presence of mind enough to say "Who cares, Miss Smarty?" until the
right time to say it had gone by. So he said nothing. But he was in a
fine rage, nevertheless. He moped into the schoolyard wishing she were
a boy, and imagining how he would trounce her if she were. He presently
encountered her and delivered a stinging remark as he passed. She
hurled one in return, and the angry breach was complete. It seemed to
Becky, in her hot resentment, that she could hardly wait for school to
"take in," she was so impatient to see Tom flogged for the injured
spelling-book. If she had had any lingering notion of exposing Alfred
Temple, Tom's offensive fling had driven it entirely away.

Poor girl, she did not know how fast she was nearing trouble herself.
The master, Mr. Dobbins, had reached middle age with an unsatisfied
ambition. The darling of his desires was, to be a doctor, but poverty
had decreed that he should be nothing higher than a village
schoolmaster. Every day he took a mysterious book out of his desk and
absorbed himself in it at times when no classes were reciting. He kept
that book under lock and key. There was not an urchin in school but was
perishing to have a glimpse of it, but the chance never came. Every boy
and girl had a theory about the nature of that book; but no two
theories were alike, and there was no way of getting at the facts in
the case. Now, as Becky was passing by the desk, which stood near the
door, she noticed that the key was in the lock! It was a precious
moment. She glanced around; found herself alone, and the next instant
she had the book in her hands. The title-page--Professor Somebody's
ANATOMY--carried no information to her mind; so she began to turn the
leaves. She came at once upon a handsomely engraved and colored
frontispiece--a human figure, stark naked. At that moment a shadow fell
on the page and Tom Sawyer stepped in at the door and caught a glimpse
of the picture. Becky snatched at the book to close it, and had the
hard luck to tear the pictured page half down the middle. She thrust
the volume into the desk, turned the key, and burst out crying with
shame and vexation.

"Tom Sawyer, you are just as mean as you can be, to sneak up on a
person and look at what they're looking at."

"How could I know you was looking at anything?"

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Tom Sawyer; you know you're
going to tell on me, and oh, what shall I do, what shall I do! I'll be
whipped, and I never was whipped in school."

Then she stamped her little foot and said:

"BE so mean if you want to! I know something that's going to happen.
You just wait and you'll see! Hateful, hateful, hateful!"--and she
flung out of the house with a new explosion of crying.

Tom stood still, rather flustered by this onslaught. Presently he said
to himself:

"What a curious kind of a fool a girl is! Never been licked in school!
Shucks! What's a licking! That's just like a girl--they're so
thin-skinned and chicken-hearted. Well, of course I ain't going to tell
old Dobbins on this little fool, because there's other ways of getting
even on her, that ain't so mean; but what of it? Old Dobbins will ask
who it was tore his book. Nobody'll answer. Then he'll do just the way
he always does--ask first one and then t'other, and when he comes to the
right girl he'll know it, without any telling. Girls' faces always tell
on them. They ain't got any backbone. She'll get licked. Well, it's a
kind of a tight place for Becky Thatcher, because there ain't any way
out of it." Tom conned the thing a moment longer, and then added: "All
right, though; she'd like to see me in just such a fix--let her sweat it
out!"

Tom joined the mob of skylarking scholars outside. In a few moments
the master arrived and school "took in." Tom did not feel a strong
interest in his studies. Every time he stole a glance at the girls'
side of the room Becky's face troubled him. Considering all things, he
did not want to pity her, and yet it was all he could do to help it. He
could get up no exultation that was really worthy the name. Presently
the spelling-book discovery was made, and Tom's mind was entirely full
of his own matters for a while after that. Becky roused up from her
lethargy of distress and showed good interest in the proceedings. She
did not expect that Tom could get out of his trouble by denying that he
spilt the ink on the book himself; and she was right. The denial only
seemed to make the thing worse for Tom. Becky supposed she would be
glad of that, and she tried to believe she was glad of it, but she
found she was not certain. When the worst came to the worst, she had an
impulse to get up and tell on Alfred Temple, but she made an effort and
forced herself to keep still--because, said she to herself, "he'll tell
about me tearing the picture sure. I wouldn't say a word, not to save
his life!"

Tom took his whipping and went back to his seat not at all
broken-hearted, for he thought it was possible that he had unknowingly
upset the ink on the spelling-book himself, in some skylarking bout--he
had denied it for form's sake and because it was custom, and had stuck
to the denial from principle.

A whole hour drifted by, the master sat nodding in his throne, the air
was drowsy with the hum of study. By and by, Mr. Dobbins straightened
himself up, yawned, then unlocked his desk, and reached for his book,
but seemed undecided whether to take it out or leave it. Most of the
pupils glanced up languidly, but there were two among them that watched
his movements with intent eyes. Mr. Dobbins fingered his book absently
for a while, then took it out and settled himself in his chair to read!
Tom shot a glance at Becky. He had seen a hunted and helpless rabbit
look as she did, with a gun levelled at its head. Instantly he forgot
his quarrel with her. Quick--something must be done! done in a flash,
too! But the very imminence of the emergency paralyzed his invention.
Good!--he had an inspiration! He would run and snatch the book, spring
through the door and fly. But his resolution shook for one little
instant, and the chance was lost--the master opened the volume. If Tom
only had the wasted opportunity back again! Too late. There was no help
for Becky now, he said. The next moment the master faced the school.
Every eye sank under his gaze. There was that in it which smote even
the innocent with fear. There was silence while one might count ten
--the master was gathering his wrath. Then he spoke: "Who tore this book?"

There was not a sound. One could have heard a pin drop. The stillness
continued; the master searched face after face for signs of guilt.

"Benjamin Rogers, did you tear this book?"

A denial. Another pause.

"Joseph Harper, did you?"

Another denial. Tom's uneasiness grew more and more intense under the
slow torture of these proceedings. The master scanned the ranks of
boys--considered a while, then turned to the girls:

"Amy Lawrence?"

A shake of the head.

"Gracie Miller?"

The same sign.

"Susan Harper, did you do this?"

Another negative. The next girl was Becky Thatcher. Tom was trembling
from head to foot with excitement and a sense of the hopelessness of
the situation.

"Rebecca Thatcher" [Tom glanced at her face--it was white with terror]
--"did you tear--no, look me in the face" [her hands rose in appeal]
--"did you tear this book?"

A thought shot like lightning through Tom's brain. He sprang to his
feet and shouted--"I done it!"

The school stared in perplexity at this incredible folly. Tom stood a
moment, to gather his dismembered faculties; and when he stepped
forward to go to his punishment the surprise, the gratitude, the
adoration that shone upon him out of poor Becky's eyes seemed pay
enough for a hundred floggings. Inspired by the splendor of his own
act, he took without an outcry the most merciless flaying that even Mr.
Dobbins had ever administered; and also received with indifference the
added cruelty of a command to remain two hours after school should be
dismissed--for he knew who would wait for him outside till his
captivity was done, and not count the tedious time as loss, either.

Tom went to bed that night planning vengeance against Alfred Temple;
for with shame and repentance Becky had told him all, not forgetting
her own treachery; but even the longing for vengeance had to give way,
soon, to pleasanter musings, and he fell asleep at last with Becky's
latest words lingering dreamily in his ear--

"Tom, how COULD you be so noble!"

CHAPTER XXI

VACATION was approaching. The schoolmaster, always severe, grew
severer and more exacting than ever, for he wanted the school to make a
good showing on "Examination" day. His rod and his ferule were seldom
idle now--at least among the smaller pupils. Only the biggest boys, and
young ladies of eighteen and twenty, escaped lashing. Mr. Dobbins'
lashings were very vigorous ones, too; for although he carried, under
his wig, a perfectly bald and shiny head, he had only reached middle
age, and there was no sign of feebleness in his muscle. As the great
day approached, all the tyranny that was in him came to the surface; he
seemed to take a vindictive pleasure in punishing the least
shortcomings. The consequence was, that the smaller boys spent their
days in terror and suffering and their nights in plotting revenge. They
threw away no opportunity to do the master a mischief. But he kept
ahead all the time. The retribution that followed every vengeful
success was so sweeping and majestic that the boys always retired from
the field badly worsted. At last they conspired together and hit upon a
plan that promised a dazzling victory. They swore in the sign-painter's
boy, told him the scheme, and asked his help. He had his own reasons
for being delighted, for the master boarded in his father's family and
had given the boy ample cause to hate him. The master's wife would go
on a visit to the country in a few days, and there would be nothing to
interfere with the plan; the master always prepared himself for great
occasions by getting pretty well fuddled, and the sign-painter's boy
said that when the dominie had reached the proper condition on
Examination Evening he would "manage the thing" while he napped in his
chair; then he would have him awakened at the right time and hurried
away to school.

In the fulness of time the interesting occasion arrived. At eight in
the evening the schoolhouse was brilliantly lighted, and adorned with
wreaths and festoons of foliage and flowers. The master sat throned in
his great chair upon a raised platform, with his blackboard behind him.
He was looking tolerably mellow. Three rows of benches on each side and
six rows in front of him were occupied by the dignitaries of the town
and by the parents of the pupils. To his left, back of the rows of
citizens, was a spacious temporary platform upon which were seated the
scholars who were to take part in the exercises of the evening; rows of
small boys, washed and dressed to an intolerable state of discomfort;
rows of gawky big boys; snowbanks of girls and young ladies clad in
lawn and muslin and conspicuously conscious of their bare arms, their
grandmothers' ancient trinkets, their bits of pink and blue ribbon and
the flowers in their hair. All the rest of the house was filled with
non-participating scholars.

The exercises began. A very little boy stood up and sheepishly
recited, "You'd scarce expect one of my age to speak in public on the
stage," etc.--accompanying himself with the painfully exact and
spasmodic gestures which a machine might have used--supposing the
machine to be a trifle out of order. But he got through safely, though
cruelly scared, and got a fine round of applause when he made his
manufactured bow and retired.

A little shamefaced girl lisped, "Mary had a little lamb," etc.,
performed a compassion-inspiring curtsy, got her meed of applause, and
sat down flushed and happy.

Tom Sawyer stepped forward with conceited confidence and soared into
the unquenchable and indestructible "Give me liberty or give me death"
speech, with fine fury and frantic gesticulation, and broke down in the
middle of it. A ghastly stage-fright seized him, his legs quaked under
him and he was like to choke. True, he had the manifest sympathy of the
house but he had the house's silence, too, which was even worse than
its sympathy. The master frowned, and this completed the disaster. Tom
struggled awhile and then retired, utterly defeated. There was a weak
attempt at applause, but it died early.

"The Boy Stood on the Burning Deck" followed; also "The Assyrian Came
Down," and other declamatory gems. Then there were reading exercises,
and a spelling fight. The meagre Latin class recited with honor. The
prime feature of the evening was in order, now--original "compositions"
by the young ladies. Each in her turn stepped forward to the edge of
the platform, cleared her throat, held up her manuscript (tied with
dainty ribbon), and proceeded to read, with labored attention to
"expression" and punctuation. The themes were the same that had been
illuminated upon similar occasions by their mothers before them, their
grandmothers, and doubtless all their ancestors in the female line
clear back to the Crusades. "Friendship" was one; "Memories of Other
Days"; "Religion in History"; "Dream Land"; "The Advantages of
Culture"; "Forms of Political Government Compared and Contrasted";
"Melancholy"; "Filial Love"; "Heart Longings," etc., etc.

A prevalent feature in these compositions was a nursed and petted
melancholy; another was a wasteful and opulent gush of "fine language";
another was a tendency to lug in by the ears particularly prized words
and phrases until they were worn entirely out; and a peculiarity that
conspicuously marked and marred them was the inveterate and intolerable
sermon that wagged its crippled tail at the end of each and every one
of them. No matter what the subject might be, a brain-racking effort
was made to squirm it into some aspect or other that the moral and
religious mind could contemplate with edification. The glaring
insincerity of these sermons was not sufficient to compass the
banishment of the fashion from the schools, and it is not sufficient
to-day; it never will be sufficient while the world stands, perhaps.
There is no school in all our land where the young ladies do not feel
obliged to close their compositions with a sermon; and you will find
that the sermon of the most frivolous and the least religious girl in
the school is always the longest and the most relentlessly pious. But
enough of this. Homely truth is unpalatable.

Let us return to the "Examination." The first composition that was
read was one entitled "Is this, then, Life?" Perhaps the reader can
endure an extract from it:

  "In the common walks of life, with what delightful
   emotions does the youthful mind look forward to some
   anticipated scene of festivity! Imagination is busy
   sketching rose-tinted pictures of joy. In fancy, the
   voluptuous votary of fashion sees herself amid the
   festive throng, 'the observed of all observers.' Her
   graceful form, arrayed in snowy robes, is whirling
   through the mazes of the joyous dance; her eye is
   brightest, her step is lightest in the gay assembly.

  "In such delicious fancies time quickly glides by,
   and the welcome hour arrives for her entrance into
   the Elysian world, of which she has had such bright
   dreams. How fairy-like does everything appear to
   her enchanted vision! Each new scene is more charming
   than the last. But after a while she finds that
   beneath this goodly exterior, all is vanity, the
   flattery which once charmed her soul, now grates
   harshly upon her ear; the ball-room has lost its
   charms; and with wasted health and imbittered heart,
   she turns away with the conviction that earthly
   pleasures cannot satisfy the longings of the soul!"

And so forth and so on. There was a buzz of gratification from time to
time during the reading, accompanied by whispered ejaculations of "How
sweet!" "How eloquent!" "So true!" etc., and after the thing had closed
with a peculiarly afflicting sermon the applause was enthusiastic.

Then arose a slim, melancholy girl, whose face had the "interesting"
paleness that comes of pills and indigestion, and read a "poem." Two
stanzas of it will do:

   "A MISSOURI MAIDEN'S FAREWELL TO ALABAMA

   "Alabama, good-bye! I love thee well!
      But yet for a while do I leave thee now!
    Sad, yes, sad thoughts of thee my heart doth swell,
      And burning recollections throng my brow!
    For I have wandered through thy flowery woods;
      Have roamed and read near Tallapoosa's stream;
    Have listened to Tallassee's warring floods,
      And wooed on Coosa's side Aurora's beam.

   "Yet shame I not to bear an o'er-full heart,
      Nor blush to turn behind my tearful eyes;
    'Tis from no stranger land I now must part,
      'Tis to no strangers left I yield these sighs.
    Welcome and home were mine within this State,
      Whose vales I leave--whose spires fade fast from me
    And cold must be mine eyes, and heart, and tete,
      When, dear Alabama! they turn cold on thee!"

There were very few there who knew what "tete" meant, but the poem was
very satisfactory, nevertheless.

Next appeared a dark-complexioned, black-eyed, black-haired young
lady, who paused an impressive moment, assumed a tragic expression, and
began to read in a measured, solemn tone:

  "A VISION

   "Dark and tempestuous was night. Around the
   throne on high not a single star quivered; but
   the deep intonations of the heavy thunder
   constantly vibrated upon the ear; whilst the
   terrific lightning revelled in angry mood
   through the cloudy chambers of heaven, seeming
   to scorn the power exerted over its terror by
   the illustrious Franklin! Even the boisterous
   winds unanimously came forth from their mystic
   homes, and blustered about as if to enhance by
   their aid the wildness of the scene.

   "At such a time, so dark, so dreary, for human
   sympathy my very spirit sighed; but instead thereof,

   "'My dearest friend, my counsellor, my comforter
   and guide--My joy in grief, my second bliss
   in joy,' came to my side. She moved like one of
   those bright beings pictured in the sunny walks
   of fancy's Eden by the romantic and young, a
   queen of beauty unadorned save by her own
   transcendent loveliness. So soft was her step, it
   failed to make even a sound, and but for the
   magical thrill imparted by her genial touch, as
   other unobtrusive beauties, she would have glided
   away un-perceived--unsought. A strange sadness
   rested upon her features, like icy tears upon
   the robe of December, as she pointed to the
   contending elements without, and bade me contemplate
   the two beings presented."

This nightmare occupied some ten pages of manuscript and wound up with
a sermon so destructive of all hope to non-Presbyterians that it took
the first prize. This composition was considered to be the very finest
effort of the evening. The mayor of the village, in delivering the
prize to the author of it, made a warm speech in which he said that it
was by far the most "eloquent" thing he had ever listened to, and that
Daniel Webster himself might well be proud of it.

It may be remarked, in passing, that the number of compositions in
which the word "beauteous" was over-fondled, and human experience
referred to as "life's page," was up to the usual average.

Now the master, mellow almost to the verge of geniality, put his chair
aside, turned his back to the audience, and began to draw a map of
America on the blackboard, to exercise the geography class upon. But he
made a sad business of it with his unsteady hand, and a smothered
titter rippled over the house. He knew what the matter was, and set
himself to right it. He sponged out lines and remade them; but he only
distorted them more than ever, and the tittering was more pronounced.
He threw his entire attention upon his work, now, as if determined not
to be put down by the mirth. He felt that all eyes were fastened upon
him; he imagined he was succeeding, and yet the tittering continued; it
even manifestly increased. And well it might. There was a garret above,
pierced with a scuttle over his head; and down through this scuttle
came a cat, suspended around the haunches by a string; she had a rag
tied about her head and jaws to keep her from mewing; as she slowly
descended she curved upward and clawed at the string, she swung
downward and clawed at the intangible air. The tittering rose higher
and higher--the cat was within six inches of the absorbed teacher's
head--down, down, a little lower, and she grabbed his wig with her
desperate claws, clung to it, and was snatched up into the garret in an
instant with her trophy still in her possession! And how the light did
blaze abroad from the master's bald pate--for the sign-painter's boy
had GILDED it!

That broke up the meeting. The boys were avenged. Vacation had come.

   NOTE:--The pretended "compositions" quoted in
   this chapter are taken without alteration from a
   volume entitled "Prose and Poetry, by a Western
   Lady"--but they are exactly and precisely after
   the schoolgirl pattern, and hence are much
   happier than any mere imitations could be.

CHAPTER XXII

TOM joined the new order of Cadets of Temperance, being attracted by
the showy character of their "regalia." He promised to abstain from
smoking, chewing, and profanity as long as he remained a member. Now he
found out a new thing--namely, that to promise not to do a thing is the
surest way in the world to make a body want to go and do that very
thing. Tom soon found himself tormented with a desire to drink and
swear; the desire grew to be so intense that nothing but the hope of a
chance to display himself in his red sash kept him from withdrawing
from the order. Fourth of July was coming; but he soon gave that up
--gave it up before he had worn his shackles over forty-eight hours--and
fixed his hopes upon old Judge Frazer, justice of the peace, who was
apparently on his deathbed and would have a big public funeral, since
he was so high an official. During three days Tom was deeply concerned
about the Judge's condition and hungry for news of it. Sometimes his
hopes ran high--so high that he would venture to get out his regalia
and practise before the looking-glass. But the Judge had a most
discouraging way of fluctuating. At last he was pronounced upon the
mend--and then convalescent. Tom was disgusted; and felt a sense of
injury, too. He handed in his resignation at once--and that night the
Judge suffered a relapse and died. Tom resolved that he would never
trust a man like that again.

The funeral was a fine thing. The Cadets paraded in a style calculated
to kill the late member with envy. Tom was a free boy again, however
--there was something in that. He could drink and swear, now--but found
to his surprise that he did not want to. The simple fact that he could,
took the desire away, and the charm of it.

Tom presently wondered to find that his coveted vacation was beginning
to hang a little heavily on his hands.

He attempted a diary--but nothing happened during three days, and so
he abandoned it.

The first of all the negro minstrel shows came to town, and made a
sensation. Tom and Joe Harper got up a band of performers and were
happy for two days.

Even the Glorious Fourth was in some sense a failure, for it rained
hard, there was no procession in consequence, and the greatest man in
the world (as Tom supposed), Mr. Benton, an actual United States
Senator, proved an overwhelming disappointment--for he was not
twenty-five feet high, nor even anywhere in the neighborhood of it.

A circus came. The boys played circus for three days afterward in
tents made of rag carpeting--admission, three pins for boys, two for
girls--and then circusing was abandoned.

A phrenologist and a mesmerizer came--and went again and left the
village duller and drearier than ever.

There were some boys-and-girls' parties, but they were so few and so
delightful that they only made the aching voids between ache the harder.

Becky Thatcher was gone to her Constantinople home to stay with her
parents during vacation--so there was no bright side to life anywhere.

The dreadful secret of the murder was a chronic misery. It was a very
cancer for permanency and pain.

Then came the measles.

During two long weeks Tom lay a prisoner, dead to the world and its
happenings. He was very ill, he was interested in nothing. When he got
upon his feet at last and moved feebly down-town, a melancholy change
had come over everything and every creature. There had been a
"revival," and everybody had "got religion," not only the adults, but
even the boys and girls. Tom went about, hoping against hope for the
sight of one blessed sinful face, but disappointment crossed him
everywhere. He found Joe Harper studying a Testament, and turned sadly
away from the depressing spectacle. He sought Ben Rogers, and found him
visiting the poor with a basket of tracts. He hunted up Jim Hollis, who
called his attention to the precious blessing of his late measles as a
warning. Every boy he encountered added another ton to his depression;
and when, in desperation, he flew for refuge at last to the bosom of
Huckleberry Finn and was received with a Scriptural quotation, his
heart broke and he crept home and to bed realizing that he alone of all
the town was lost, forever and forever.

And that night there came on a terrific storm, with driving rain,
awful claps of thunder and blinding sheets of lightning. He covered his
head with the bedclothes and waited in a horror of suspense for his
doom; for he had not the shadow of a doubt that all this hubbub was
about him. He believed he had taxed the forbearance of the powers above
to the extremity of endurance and that this was the result. It might
have seemed to him a waste of pomp and ammunition to kill a bug with a
battery of artillery, but there seemed nothing incongruous about the
getting up such an expensive thunderstorm as this to knock the turf
from under an insect like himself.

By and by the tempest spent itself and died without accomplishing its
object. The boy's first impulse was to be grateful, and reform. His
second was to wait--for there might not be any more storms.

The next day the doctors were back; Tom had relapsed. The three weeks
he spent on his back this time seemed an entire age. When he got abroad
at last he was hardly grateful that he had been spared, remembering how
lonely was his estate, how companionless and forlorn he was. He drifted
listlessly down the street and found Jim Hollis acting as judge in a
juvenile court that was trying a cat for murder, in the presence of her
victim, a bird. He found Joe Harper and Huck Finn up an alley eating a
stolen melon. Poor lads! they--like Tom--had suffered a relapse.

CHAPTER XXIII

AT last the sleepy atmosphere was stirred--and vigorously: the murder
trial came on in the court. It became the absorbing topic of village
talk immediately. Tom could not get away from it. Every reference to
the murder sent a shudder to his heart, for his troubled conscience and
fears almost persuaded him that these remarks were put forth in his
hearing as "feelers"; he did not see how he could be suspected of
knowing anything about the murder, but still he could not be
comfortable in the midst of this gossip. It kept him in a cold shiver
all the time. He took Huck to a lonely place to have a talk with him.
It would be some relief to unseal his tongue for a little while; to
divide his burden of distress with another sufferer. Moreover, he
wanted to assure himself that Huck had remained discreet.

"Huck, have you ever told anybody about--that?"

"'Bout what?"

"You know what."

"Oh--'course I haven't."

"Never a word?"

"Never a solitary word, so help me. What makes you ask?"

"Well, I was afeard."

"Why, Tom Sawyer, we wouldn't be alive two days if that got found out.
YOU know that."

Tom felt more comfortable. After a pause:

"Huck, they couldn't anybody get you to tell, could they?"

"Get me to tell? Why, if I wanted that half-breed devil to drownd me
they could get me to tell. They ain't no different way."

"Well, that's all right, then. I reckon we're safe as long as we keep
mum. But let's swear again, anyway. It's more surer."

"I'm agreed."

So they swore again with dread solemnities.

"What is the talk around, Huck? I've heard a power of it."

"Talk? Well, it's just Muff Potter, Muff Potter, Muff Potter all the
time. It keeps me in a sweat, constant, so's I want to hide som'ers."

"That's just the same way they go on round me. I reckon he's a goner.
Don't you feel sorry for him, sometimes?"

"Most always--most always. He ain't no account; but then he hain't
ever done anything to hurt anybody. Just fishes a little, to get money
to get drunk on--and loafs around considerable; but lord, we all do
that--leastways most of us--preachers and such like. But he's kind of
good--he give me half a fish, once, when there warn't enough for two;
and lots of times he's kind of stood by me when I was out of luck."

"Well, he's mended kites for me, Huck, and knitted hooks on to my
line. I wish we could get him out of there."

"My! we couldn't get him out, Tom. And besides, 'twouldn't do any
good; they'd ketch him again."

"Yes--so they would. But I hate to hear 'em abuse him so like the
dickens when he never done--that."

"I do too, Tom. Lord, I hear 'em say he's the bloodiest looking
villain in this country, and they wonder he wasn't ever hung before."

"Yes, they talk like that, all the time. I've heard 'em say that if he
was to get free they'd lynch him."

"And they'd do it, too."

The boys had a long talk, but it brought them little comfort. As the
twilight drew on, they found themselves hanging about the neighborhood
of the little isolated jail, perhaps with an undefined hope that
something would happen that might clear away their difficulties. But
nothing happened; there seemed to be no angels or fairies interested in
this luckless captive.

The boys did as they had often done before--went to the cell grating
and gave Potter some tobacco and matches. He was on the ground floor
and there were no guards.

His gratitude for their gifts had always smote their consciences
before--it cut deeper than ever, this time. They felt cowardly and
treacherous to the last degree when Potter said:

"You've been mighty good to me, boys--better'n anybody else in this
town. And I don't forget it, I don't. Often I says to myself, says I,
'I used to mend all the boys' kites and things, and show 'em where the
good fishin' places was, and befriend 'em what I could, and now they've
all forgot old Muff when he's in trouble; but Tom don't, and Huck
don't--THEY don't forget him, says I, 'and I don't forget them.' Well,
boys, I done an awful thing--drunk and crazy at the time--that's the
only way I account for it--and now I got to swing for it, and it's
right. Right, and BEST, too, I reckon--hope so, anyway. Well, we won't
talk about that. I don't want to make YOU feel bad; you've befriended
me. But what I want to say, is, don't YOU ever get drunk--then you won't
ever get here. Stand a litter furder west--so--that's it; it's a prime
comfort to see faces that's friendly when a body's in such a muck of
trouble, and there don't none come here but yourn. Good friendly
faces--good friendly faces. Git up on one another's backs and let me
touch 'em. That's it. Shake hands--yourn'll come through the bars, but
mine's too big. Little hands, and weak--but they've helped Muff Potter
a power, and they'd help him more if they could."

Tom went home miserable, and his dreams that night were full of
horrors. The next day and the day after, he hung about the court-room,
drawn by an almost irresistible impulse to go in, but forcing himself
to stay out. Huck was having the same experience. They studiously
avoided each other. Each wandered away, from time to time, but the same
dismal fascination always brought them back presently. Tom kept his
ears open when idlers sauntered out of the court-room, but invariably
heard distressing news--the toils were closing more and more
relentlessly around poor Potter. At the end of the second day the
village talk was to the effect that Injun Joe's evidence stood firm and
unshaken, and that there was not the slightest question as to what the
jury's verdict would be.

Tom was out late, that night, and came to bed through the window. He
was in a tremendous state of excitement. It was hours before he got to
sleep. All the village flocked to the court-house the next morning, for
this was to be the great day. Both sexes were about equally represented
in the packed audience. After a long wait the jury filed in and took
their places; shortly afterward, Potter, pale and haggard, timid and
hopeless, was brought in, with chains upon him, and seated where all
the curious eyes could stare at him; no less conspicuous was Injun Joe,
stolid as ever. There was another pause, and then the judge arrived and
the sheriff proclaimed the opening of the court. The usual whisperings
among the lawyers and gathering together of papers followed. These
details and accompanying delays worked up an atmosphere of preparation
that was as impressive as it was fascinating.

Now a witness was called who testified that he found Muff Potter
washing in the brook, at an early hour of the morning that the murder
was discovered, and that he immediately sneaked away. After some
further questioning, counsel for the prosecution said:

"Take the witness."

The prisoner raised his eyes for a moment, but dropped them again when
his own counsel said:

"I have no questions to ask him."

The next witness proved the finding of the knife near the corpse.
Counsel for the prosecution said:

"Take the witness."

"I have no questions to ask him," Potter's lawyer replied.

A third witness swore he had often seen the knife in Potter's
possession.

"Take the witness."

Counsel for Potter declined to question him. The faces of the audience
began to betray annoyance. Did this attorney mean to throw away his
client's life without an effort?

Several witnesses deposed concerning Potter's guilty behavior when
brought to the scene of the murder. They were allowed to leave the
stand without being cross-questioned.

Every detail of the damaging circumstances that occurred in the
graveyard upon that morning which all present remembered so well was
brought out by credible witnesses, but none of them were cross-examined
by Potter's lawyer. The perplexity and dissatisfaction of the house
expressed itself in murmurs and provoked a reproof from the bench.
Counsel for the prosecution now said:

"By the oaths of citizens whose simple word is above suspicion, we
have fastened this awful crime, beyond all possibility of question,
upon the unhappy prisoner at the bar. We rest our case here."

A groan escaped from poor Potter, and he put his face in his hands and
rocked his body softly to and fro, while a painful silence reigned in
the court-room. Many men were moved, and many women's compassion
testified itself in tears. Counsel for the defence rose and said:

"Your honor, in our remarks at the opening of this trial, we
foreshadowed our purpose to prove that our client did this fearful deed
while under the influence of a blind and irresponsible delirium
produced by drink. We have changed our mind. We shall not offer that
plea." [Then to the clerk:] "Call Thomas Sawyer!"

A puzzled amazement awoke in every face in the house, not even
excepting Potter's. Every eye fastened itself with wondering interest
upon Tom as he rose and took his place upon the stand. The boy looked
wild enough, for he was badly scared. The oath was administered.

"Thomas Sawyer, where were you on the seventeenth of June, about the
hour of midnight?"

Tom glanced at Injun Joe's iron face and his tongue failed him. The
audience listened breathless, but the words refused to come. After a
few moments, however, the boy got a little of his strength back, and
managed to put enough of it into his voice to make part of the house
hear:

"In the graveyard!"

"A little bit louder, please. Don't be afraid. You were--"

"In the graveyard."

A contemptuous smile flitted across Injun Joe's face.

"Were you anywhere near Horse Williams' grave?"

"Yes, sir."

"Speak up--just a trifle louder. How near were you?"

"Near as I am to you."

"Were you hidden, or not?"

"I was hid."

"Where?"

"Behind the elms that's on the edge of the grave."

Injun Joe gave a barely perceptible start.

"Any one with you?"

"Yes, sir. I went there with--"

"Wait--wait a moment. Never mind mentioning your companion's name. We
will produce him at the proper time. Did you carry anything there with
you."

Tom hesitated and looked confused.

"Speak out, my boy--don't be diffident. The truth is always
respectable. What did you take there?"

"Only a--a--dead cat."

There was a ripple of mirth, which the court checked.

"We will produce the skeleton of that cat. Now, my boy, tell us
everything that occurred--tell it in your own way--don't skip anything,
and don't be afraid."

Tom began--hesitatingly at first, but as he warmed to his subject his
words flowed more and more easily; in a little while every sound ceased
but his own voice; every eye fixed itself upon him; with parted lips
and bated breath the audience hung upon his words, taking no note of
time, rapt in the ghastly fascinations of the tale. The strain upon
pent emotion reached its climax when the boy said:

"--and as the doctor fetched the board around and Muff Potter fell,
Injun Joe jumped with the knife and--"

Crash! Quick as lightning the half-breed sprang for a window, tore his
way through all opposers, and was gone!

CHAPTER XXIV

TOM was a glittering hero once more--the pet of the old, the envy of
the young. His name even went into immortal print, for the village
paper magnified him. There were some that believed he would be
President, yet, if he escaped hanging.

As usual, the fickle, unreasoning world took Muff Potter to its bosom
and fondled him as lavishly as it had abused him before. But that sort
of conduct is to the world's credit; therefore it is not well to find
fault with it.

Tom's days were days of splendor and exultation to him, but his nights
were seasons of horror. Injun Joe infested all his dreams, and always
with doom in his eye. Hardly any temptation could persuade the boy to
stir abroad after nightfall. Poor Huck was in the same state of
wretchedness and terror, for Tom had told the whole story to the lawyer
the night before the great day of the trial, and Huck was sore afraid
that his share in the business might leak out, yet, notwithstanding
Injun Joe's flight had saved him the suffering of testifying in court.
The poor fellow had got the attorney to promise secrecy, but what of
that? Since Tom's harassed conscience had managed to drive him to the
lawyer's house by night and wring a dread tale from lips that had been
sealed with the dismalest and most formidable of oaths, Huck's
confidence in the human race was well-nigh obliterated.

Daily Muff Potter's gratitude made Tom glad he had spoken; but nightly
he wished he had sealed up his tongue.

Half the time Tom was afraid Injun Joe would never be captured; the
other half he was afraid he would be. He felt sure he never could draw
a safe breath again until that man was dead and he had seen the corpse.

Rewards had been offered, the country had been scoured, but no Injun
Joe was found. One of those omniscient and awe-inspiring marvels, a
detective, came up from St. Louis, moused around, shook his head,
looked wise, and made that sort of astounding success which members of
that craft usually achieve. That is to say, he "found a clew." But you
can't hang a "clew" for murder, and so after that detective had got
through and gone home, Tom felt just as insecure as he was before.

The slow days drifted on, and each left behind it a slightly lightened
weight of apprehension.

CHAPTER XXV

THERE comes a time in every rightly-constructed boy's life when he has
a raging desire to go somewhere and dig for hidden treasure. This
desire suddenly came upon Tom one day. He sallied out to find Joe
Harper, but failed of success. Next he sought Ben Rogers; he had gone
fishing. Presently he stumbled upon Huck Finn the Red-Handed. Huck
would answer. Tom took him to a private place and opened the matter to
him confidentially. Huck was willing. Huck was always willing to take a
hand in any enterprise that offered entertainment and required no
capital, for he had a troublesome superabundance of that sort of time
which is not money. "Where'll we dig?" said Huck.

"Oh, most anywhere."

"Why, is it hid all around?"

"No, indeed it ain't. It's hid in mighty particular places, Huck
--sometimes on islands, sometimes in rotten chests under the end of a
limb of an old dead tree, just where the shadow falls at midnight; but
mostly under the floor in ha'nted houses."

"Who hides it?"

"Why, robbers, of course--who'd you reckon? Sunday-school
sup'rintendents?"

"I don't know. If 'twas mine I wouldn't hide it; I'd spend it and have
a good time."

"So would I. But robbers don't do that way. They always hide it and
leave it there."

"Don't they come after it any more?"

"No, they think they will, but they generally forget the marks, or
else they die. Anyway, it lays there a long time and gets rusty; and by
and by somebody finds an old yellow paper that tells how to find the
marks--a paper that's got to be ciphered over about a week because it's
mostly signs and hy'roglyphics."

"HyroQwhich?"

"Hy'roglyphics--pictures and things, you know, that don't seem to mean
anything."

"Have you got one of them papers, Tom?"

"No."

"Well then, how you going to find the marks?"

"I don't want any marks. They always bury it under a ha'nted house or
on an island, or under a dead tree that's got one limb sticking out.
Well, we've tried Jackson's Island a little, and we can try it again
some time; and there's the old ha'nted house up the Still-House branch,
and there's lots of dead-limb trees--dead loads of 'em."

"Is it under all of them?"

"How you talk! No!"

"Then how you going to know which one to go for?"

"Go for all of 'em!"

"Why, Tom, it'll take all summer."

"Well, what of that? Suppose you find a brass pot with a hundred
dollars in it, all rusty and gray, or rotten chest full of di'monds.
How's that?"

Huck's eyes glowed.

"That's bully. Plenty bully enough for me. Just you gimme the hundred
dollars and I don't want no di'monds."

"All right. But I bet you I ain't going to throw off on di'monds. Some
of 'em's worth twenty dollars apiece--there ain't any, hardly, but's
worth six bits or a dollar."

"No! Is that so?"

"Cert'nly--anybody'll tell you so. Hain't you ever seen one, Huck?"

"Not as I remember."

"Oh, kings have slathers of them."

"Well, I don' know no kings, Tom."

"I reckon you don't. But if you was to go to Europe you'd see a raft
of 'em hopping around."

"Do they hop?"

"Hop?--your granny! No!"

"Well, what did you say they did, for?"

"Shucks, I only meant you'd SEE 'em--not hopping, of course--what do
they want to hop for?--but I mean you'd just see 'em--scattered around,
you know, in a kind of a general way. Like that old humpbacked Richard."

"Richard? What's his other name?"

"He didn't have any other name. Kings don't have any but a given name."

"No?"

"But they don't."

"Well, if they like it, Tom, all right; but I don't want to be a king
and have only just a given name, like a nigger. But say--where you
going to dig first?"

"Well, I don't know. S'pose we tackle that old dead-limb tree on the
hill t'other side of Still-House branch?"

"I'm agreed."

So they got a crippled pick and a shovel, and set out on their
three-mile tramp. They arrived hot and panting, and threw themselves
down in the shade of a neighboring elm to rest and have a smoke.

"I like this," said Tom.

"So do I."

"Say, Huck, if we find a treasure here, what you going to do with your
share?"

"Well, I'll have pie and a glass of soda every day, and I'll go to
every circus that comes along. I bet I'll have a gay time."

"Well, ain't you going to save any of it?"

"Save it? What for?"

"Why, so as to have something to live on, by and by."

"Oh, that ain't any use. Pap would come back to thish-yer town some
day and get his claws on it if I didn't hurry up, and I tell you he'd
clean it out pretty quick. What you going to do with yourn, Tom?"

"I'm going to buy a new drum, and a sure-'nough sword, and a red
necktie and a bull pup, and get married."

"Married!"

"That's it."

"Tom, you--why, you ain't in your right mind."

"Wait--you'll see."

"Well, that's the foolishest thing you could do. Look at pap and my
mother. Fight! Why, they used to fight all the time. I remember, mighty
well."

"That ain't anything. The girl I'm going to marry won't fight."

"Tom, I reckon they're all alike. They'll all comb a body. Now you
better think 'bout this awhile. I tell you you better. What's the name
of the gal?"

"It ain't a gal at all--it's a girl."

"It's all the same, I reckon; some says gal, some says girl--both's
right, like enough. Anyway, what's her name, Tom?"

"I'll tell you some time--not now."

"All right--that'll do. Only if you get married I'll be more lonesomer
than ever."

"No you won't. You'll come and live with me. Now stir out of this and
we'll go to digging."

They worked and sweated for half an hour. No result. They toiled
another half-hour. Still no result. Huck said:

"Do they always bury it as deep as this?"

"Sometimes--not always. Not generally. I reckon we haven't got the
right place."

So they chose a new spot and began again. The labor dragged a little,
but still they made progress. They pegged away in silence for some
time. Finally Huck leaned on his shovel, swabbed the beaded drops from
his brow with his sleeve, and said:

"Where you going to dig next, after we get this one?"

"I reckon maybe we'll tackle the old tree that's over yonder on
Cardiff Hill back of the widow's."

"I reckon that'll be a good one. But won't the widow take it away from
us, Tom? It's on her land."

"SHE take it away! Maybe she'd like to try it once. Whoever finds one
of these hid treasures, it belongs to him. It don't make any difference
whose land it's on."

That was satisfactory. The work went on. By and by Huck said:

"Blame it, we must be in the wrong place again. What do you think?"

"It is mighty curious, Huck. I don't understand it. Sometimes witches
interfere. I reckon maybe that's what's the trouble now."

"Shucks! Witches ain't got no power in the daytime."

"Well, that's so. I didn't think of that. Oh, I know what the matter
is! What a blamed lot of fools we are! You got to find out where the
shadow of the limb falls at midnight, and that's where you dig!"

"Then consound it, we've fooled away all this work for nothing. Now
hang it all, we got to come back in the night. It's an awful long way.
Can you get out?"

"I bet I will. We've got to do it to-night, too, because if somebody
sees these holes they'll know in a minute what's here and they'll go
for it."

"Well, I'll come around and maow to-night."

"All right. Let's hide the tools in the bushes."

The boys were there that night, about the appointed time. They sat in
the shadow waiting. It was a lonely place, and an hour made solemn by
old traditions. Spirits whispered in the rustling leaves, ghosts lurked
in the murky nooks, the deep baying of a hound floated up out of the
distance, an owl answered with his sepulchral note. The boys were
subdued by these solemnities, and talked little. By and by they judged
that twelve had come; they marked where the shadow fell, and began to
dig. Their hopes commenced to rise. Their interest grew stronger, and
their industry kept pace with it. The hole deepened and still deepened,
but every time their hearts jumped to hear the pick strike upon
something, they only suffered a new disappointment. It was only a stone
or a chunk. At last Tom said:

"It ain't any use, Huck, we're wrong again."

"Well, but we CAN'T be wrong. We spotted the shadder to a dot."

"I know it, but then there's another thing."

"What's that?".

"Why, we only guessed at the time. Like enough it was too late or too
early."

Huck dropped his shovel.

"That's it," said he. "That's the very trouble. We got to give this
one up. We can't ever tell the right time, and besides this kind of
thing's too awful, here this time of night with witches and ghosts
a-fluttering around so. I feel as if something's behind me all the time;
and I'm afeard to turn around, becuz maybe there's others in front
a-waiting for a chance. I been creeping all over, ever since I got here."

"Well, I've been pretty much so, too, Huck. They most always put in a
dead man when they bury a treasure under a tree, to look out for it."

"Lordy!"

"Yes, they do. I've always heard that."

"Tom, I don't like to fool around much where there's dead people. A
body's bound to get into trouble with 'em, sure."

"I don't like to stir 'em up, either. S'pose this one here was to
stick his skull out and say something!"

"Don't Tom! It's awful."

"Well, it just is. Huck, I don't feel comfortable a bit."

"Say, Tom, let's give this place up, and try somewheres else."

"All right, I reckon we better."

"What'll it be?"

Tom considered awhile; and then said:

"The ha'nted house. That's it!"

"Blame it, I don't like ha'nted houses, Tom. Why, they're a dern sight
worse'n dead people. Dead people might talk, maybe, but they don't come
sliding around in a shroud, when you ain't noticing, and peep over your
shoulder all of a sudden and grit their teeth, the way a ghost does. I
couldn't stand such a thing as that, Tom--nobody could."

"Yes, but, Huck, ghosts don't travel around only at night. They won't
hender us from digging there in the daytime."

"Well, that's so. But you know mighty well people don't go about that
ha'nted house in the day nor the night."

"Well, that's mostly because they don't like to go where a man's been
murdered, anyway--but nothing's ever been seen around that house except
in the night--just some blue lights slipping by the windows--no regular
ghosts."

"Well, where you see one of them blue lights flickering around, Tom,
you can bet there's a ghost mighty close behind it. It stands to
reason. Becuz you know that they don't anybody but ghosts use 'em."

"Yes, that's so. But anyway they don't come around in the daytime, so
what's the use of our being afeard?"

"Well, all right. We'll tackle the ha'nted house if you say so--but I
reckon it's taking chances."

They had started down the hill by this time. There in the middle of
the moonlit valley below them stood the "ha'nted" house, utterly
isolated, its fences gone long ago, rank weeds smothering the very
doorsteps, the chimney crumbled to ruin, the window-sashes vacant, a
corner of the roof caved in. The boys gazed awhile, half expecting to
see a blue light flit past a window; then talking in a low tone, as
befitted the time and the circumstances, they struck far off to the
right, to give the haunted house a wide berth, and took their way
homeward through the woods that adorned the rearward side of Cardiff
Hill.

CHAPTER XXVI

ABOUT noon the next day the boys arrived at the dead tree; they had
come for their tools. Tom was impatient to go to the haunted house;
Huck was measurably so, also--but suddenly said:

"Lookyhere, Tom, do you know what day it is?"

Tom mentally ran over the days of the week, and then quickly lifted
his eyes with a startled look in them--

"My! I never once thought of it, Huck!"

"Well, I didn't neither, but all at once it popped onto me that it was
Friday."

"Blame it, a body can't be too careful, Huck. We might 'a' got into an
awful scrape, tackling such a thing on a Friday."

"MIGHT! Better say we WOULD! There's some lucky days, maybe, but
Friday ain't."

"Any fool knows that. I don't reckon YOU was the first that found it
out, Huck."

"Well, I never said I was, did I? And Friday ain't all, neither. I had
a rotten bad dream last night--dreampt about rats."

"No! Sure sign of trouble. Did they fight?"

"No."

"Well, that's good, Huck. When they don't fight it's only a sign that
there's trouble around, you know. All we got to do is to look mighty
sharp and keep out of it. We'll drop this thing for to-day, and play.
Do you know Robin Hood, Huck?"

"No. Who's Robin Hood?"

"Why, he was one of the greatest men that was ever in England--and the
best. He was a robber."

"Cracky, I wisht I was. Who did he rob?"

"Only sheriffs and bishops and rich people and kings, and such like.
But he never bothered the poor. He loved 'em. He always divided up with
'em perfectly square."

"Well, he must 'a' been a brick."

"I bet you he was, Huck. Oh, he was the noblest man that ever was.
They ain't any such men now, I can tell you. He could lick any man in
England, with one hand tied behind him; and he could take his yew bow
and plug a ten-cent piece every time, a mile and a half."

"What's a YEW bow?"

"I don't know. It's some kind of a bow, of course. And if he hit that
dime only on the edge he would set down and cry--and curse. But we'll
play Robin Hood--it's nobby fun. I'll learn you."

"I'm agreed."

So they played Robin Hood all the afternoon, now and then casting a
yearning eye down upon the haunted house and passing a remark about the
morrow's prospects and possibilities there. As the sun began to sink
into the west they took their way homeward athwart the long shadows of
the trees and soon were buried from sight in the forests of Cardiff
Hill.

On Saturday, shortly after noon, the boys were at the dead tree again.
They had a smoke and a chat in the shade, and then dug a little in
their last hole, not with great hope, but merely because Tom said there
were so many cases where people had given up a treasure after getting
down within six inches of it, and then somebody else had come along and
turned it up with a single thrust of a shovel. The thing failed this
time, however, so the boys shouldered their tools and went away feeling
that they had not trifled with fortune, but had fulfilled all the
requirements that belong to the business of treasure-hunting.

When they reached the haunted house there was something so weird and
grisly about the dead silence that reigned there under the baking sun,
and something so depressing about the loneliness and desolation of the
place, that they were afraid, for a moment, to venture in. Then they
crept to the door and took a trembling peep. They saw a weed-grown,
floorless room, unplastered, an ancient fireplace, vacant windows, a
ruinous staircase; and here, there, and everywhere hung ragged and
abandoned cobwebs. They presently entered, softly, with quickened
pulses, talking in whispers, ears alert to catch the slightest sound,
and muscles tense and ready for instant retreat.

In a little while familiarity modified their fears and they gave the
place a critical and interested examination, rather admiring their own
boldness, and wondering at it, too. Next they wanted to look up-stairs.
This was something like cutting off retreat, but they got to daring
each other, and of course there could be but one result--they threw
their tools into a corner and made the ascent. Up there were the same
signs of decay. In one corner they found a closet that promised
mystery, but the promise was a fraud--there was nothing in it. Their
courage was up now and well in hand. They were about to go down and
begin work when--

"Sh!" said Tom.

"What is it?" whispered Huck, blanching with fright.

"Sh!... There!... Hear it?"

"Yes!... Oh, my! Let's run!"

"Keep still! Don't you budge! They're coming right toward the door."

The boys stretched themselves upon the floor with their eyes to
knot-holes in the planking, and lay waiting, in a misery of fear.

"They've stopped.... No--coming.... Here they are. Don't whisper
another word, Huck. My goodness, I wish I was out of this!"

Two men entered. Each boy said to himself: "There's the old deaf and
dumb Spaniard that's been about town once or twice lately--never saw
t'other man before."

"T'other" was a ragged, unkempt creature, with nothing very pleasant
in his face. The Spaniard was wrapped in a serape; he had bushy white
whiskers; long white hair flowed from under his sombrero, and he wore
green goggles. When they came in, "t'other" was talking in a low voice;
they sat down on the ground, facing the door, with their backs to the
wall, and the speaker continued his remarks. His manner became less
guarded and his words more distinct as he proceeded:

"No," said he, "I've thought it all over, and I don't like it. It's
dangerous."

"Dangerous!" grunted the "deaf and dumb" Spaniard--to the vast
surprise of the boys. "Milksop!"

This voice made the boys gasp and quake. It was Injun Joe's! There was
silence for some time. Then Joe said:

"What's any more dangerous than that job up yonder--but nothing's come
of it."

"That's different. Away up the river so, and not another house about.
'Twon't ever be known that we tried, anyway, long as we didn't succeed."

"Well, what's more dangerous than coming here in the daytime!--anybody
would suspicion us that saw us."

"I know that. But there warn't any other place as handy after that
fool of a job. I want to quit this shanty. I wanted to yesterday, only
it warn't any use trying to stir out of here, with those infernal boys
playing over there on the hill right in full view."

"Those infernal boys" quaked again under the inspiration of this
remark, and thought how lucky it was that they had remembered it was
Friday and concluded to wait a day. They wished in their hearts they
had waited a year.

The two men got out some food and made a luncheon. After a long and
thoughtful silence, Injun Joe said:

"Look here, lad--you go back up the river where you belong. Wait there
till you hear from me. I'll take the chances on dropping into this town
just once more, for a look. We'll do that 'dangerous' job after I've
spied around a little and think things look well for it. Then for
Texas! We'll leg it together!"

This was satisfactory. Both men presently fell to yawning, and Injun
Joe said:

"I'm dead for sleep! It's your turn to watch."

He curled down in the weeds and soon began to snore. His comrade
stirred him once or twice and he became quiet. Presently the watcher
began to nod; his head drooped lower and lower, both men began to snore
now.

The boys drew a long, grateful breath. Tom whispered:

"Now's our chance--come!"

Huck said:

"I can't--I'd die if they was to wake."

Tom urged--Huck held back. At last Tom rose slowly and softly, and
started alone. But the first step he made wrung such a hideous creak
from the crazy floor that he sank down almost dead with fright. He
never made a second attempt. The boys lay there counting the dragging
moments till it seemed to them that time must be done and eternity
growing gray; and then they were grateful to note that at last the sun
was setting.

Now one snore ceased. Injun Joe sat up, stared around--smiled grimly
upon his comrade, whose head was drooping upon his knees--stirred him
up with his foot and said:

"Here! YOU'RE a watchman, ain't you! All right, though--nothing's
happened."

"My! have I been asleep?"

"Oh, partly, partly. Nearly time for us to be moving, pard. What'll we
do with what little swag we've got left?"

"I don't know--leave it here as we've always done, I reckon. No use to
take it away till we start south. Six hundred and fifty in silver's
something to carry."

"Well--all right--it won't matter to come here once more."

"No--but I'd say come in the night as we used to do--it's better."

"Yes: but look here; it may be a good while before I get the right
chance at that job; accidents might happen; 'tain't in such a very good
place; we'll just regularly bury it--and bury it deep."

"Good idea," said the comrade, who walked across the room, knelt down,
raised one of the rearward hearth-stones and took out a bag that
jingled pleasantly. He subtracted from it twenty or thirty dollars for
himself and as much for Injun Joe, and passed the bag to the latter,
who was on his knees in the corner, now, digging with his bowie-knife.

The boys forgot all their fears, all their miseries in an instant.
With gloating eyes they watched every movement. Luck!--the splendor of
it was beyond all imagination! Six hundred dollars was money enough to
make half a dozen boys rich! Here was treasure-hunting under the
happiest auspices--there would not be any bothersome uncertainty as to
where to dig. They nudged each other every moment--eloquent nudges and
easily understood, for they simply meant--"Oh, but ain't you glad NOW
we're here!"

Joe's knife struck upon something.

"Hello!" said he.

"What is it?" said his comrade.

"Half-rotten plank--no, it's a box, I believe. Here--bear a hand and
we'll see what it's here for. Never mind, I've broke a hole."

He reached his hand in and drew it out--

"Man, it's money!"

The two men examined the handful of coins. They were gold. The boys
above were as excited as themselves, and as delighted.

Joe's comrade said:

"We'll make quick work of this. There's an old rusty pick over amongst
the weeds in the corner the other side of the fireplace--I saw it a
minute ago."

He ran and brought the boys' pick and shovel. Injun Joe took the pick,
looked it over critically, shook his head, muttered something to
himself, and then began to use it. The box was soon unearthed. It was
not very large; it was iron bound and had been very strong before the
slow years had injured it. The men contemplated the treasure awhile in
blissful silence.

"Pard, there's thousands of dollars here," said Injun Joe.

"'Twas always said that Murrel's gang used to be around here one
summer," the stranger observed.

"I know it," said Injun Joe; "and this looks like it, I should say."

"Now you won't need to do that job."

The half-breed frowned. Said he:

"You don't know me. Least you don't know all about that thing. 'Tain't
robbery altogether--it's REVENGE!" and a wicked light flamed in his
eyes. "I'll need your help in it. When it's finished--then Texas. Go
home to your Nance and your kids, and stand by till you hear from me."

"Well--if you say so; what'll we do with this--bury it again?"

"Yes. [Ravishing delight overhead.] NO! by the great Sachem, no!
[Profound distress overhead.] I'd nearly forgot. That pick had fresh
earth on it! [The boys were sick with terror in a moment.] What
business has a pick and a shovel here? What business with fresh earth
on them? Who brought them here--and where are they gone? Have you heard
anybody?--seen anybody? What! bury it again and leave them to come and
see the ground disturbed? Not exactly--not exactly. We'll take it to my
den."

"Why, of course! Might have thought of that before. You mean Number
One?"

"No--Number Two--under the cross. The other place is bad--too common."

"All right. It's nearly dark enough to start."

Injun Joe got up and went about from window to window cautiously
peeping out. Presently he said:

"Who could have brought those tools here? Do you reckon they can be
up-stairs?"

The boys' breath forsook them. Injun Joe put his hand on his knife,
halted a moment, undecided, and then turned toward the stairway. The
boys thought of the closet, but their strength was gone. The steps came
creaking up the stairs--the intolerable distress of the situation woke
the stricken resolution of the lads--they were about to spring for the
closet, when there was a crash of rotten timbers and Injun Joe landed
on the ground amid the debris of the ruined stairway. He gathered
himself up cursing, and his comrade said:

"Now what's the use of all that? If it's anybody, and they're up
there, let them STAY there--who cares? If they want to jump down, now,
and get into trouble, who objects? It will be dark in fifteen minutes
--and then let them follow us if they want to. I'm willing. In my
opinion, whoever hove those things in here caught a sight of us and
took us for ghosts or devils or something. I'll bet they're running
yet."

Joe grumbled awhile; then he agreed with his friend that what daylight
was left ought to be economized in getting things ready for leaving.
Shortly afterward they slipped out of the house in the deepening
twilight, and moved toward the river with their precious box.

Tom and Huck rose up, weak but vastly relieved, and stared after them
through the chinks between the logs of the house. Follow? Not they.
They were content to reach ground again without broken necks, and take
the townward track over the hill. They did not talk much. They were too
much absorbed in hating themselves--hating the ill luck that made them
take the spade and the pick there. But for that, Injun Joe never would
have suspected. He would have hidden the silver with the gold to wait
there till his "revenge" was satisfied, and then he would have had the
misfortune to find that money turn up missing. Bitter, bitter luck that
the tools were ever brought there!

They resolved to keep a lookout for that Spaniard when he should come
to town spying out for chances to do his revengeful job, and follow him
to "Number Two," wherever that might be. Then a ghastly thought
occurred to Tom.

"Revenge? What if he means US, Huck!"

"Oh, don't!" said Huck, nearly fainting.

They talked it all over, and as they entered town they agreed to
believe that he might possibly mean somebody else--at least that he
might at least mean nobody but Tom, since only Tom had testified.

Very, very small comfort it was to Tom to be alone in danger! Company
would be a palpable improvement, he thought.

CHAPTER XXVII

THE adventure of the day mightily tormented Tom's dreams that night.
Four times he had his hands on that rich treasure and four times it
wasted to nothingness in his fingers as sleep forsook him and
wakefulness brought back the hard reality of his misfortune. As he lay
in the early morning recalling the incidents of his great adventure, he
noticed that they seemed curiously subdued and far away--somewhat as if
they had happened in another world, or in a time long gone by. Then it
occurred to him that the great adventure itself must be a dream! There
was one very strong argument in favor of this idea--namely, that the
quantity of coin he had seen was too vast to be real. He had never seen
as much as fifty dollars in one mass before, and he was like all boys
of his age and station in life, in that he imagined that all references
to "hundreds" and "thousands" were mere fanciful forms of speech, and
that no such sums really existed in the world. He never had supposed
for a moment that so large a sum as a hundred dollars was to be found
in actual money in any one's possession. If his notions of hidden
treasure had been analyzed, they would have been found to consist of a
handful of real dimes and a bushel of vague, splendid, ungraspable
dollars.

But the incidents of his adventure grew sensibly sharper and clearer
under the attrition of thinking them over, and so he presently found
himself leaning to the impression that the thing might not have been a
dream, after all. This uncertainty must be swept away. He would snatch
a hurried breakfast and go and find Huck. Huck was sitting on the
gunwale of a flatboat, listlessly dangling his feet in the water and
looking very melancholy. Tom concluded to let Huck lead up to the
subject. If he did not do it, then the adventure would be proved to
have been only a dream.

"Hello, Huck!"

"Hello, yourself."

Silence, for a minute.

"Tom, if we'd 'a' left the blame tools at the dead tree, we'd 'a' got
the money. Oh, ain't it awful!"

"'Tain't a dream, then, 'tain't a dream! Somehow I most wish it was.
Dog'd if I don't, Huck."

"What ain't a dream?"

"Oh, that thing yesterday. I been half thinking it was."

"Dream! If them stairs hadn't broke down you'd 'a' seen how much dream
it was! I've had dreams enough all night--with that patch-eyed Spanish
devil going for me all through 'em--rot him!"

"No, not rot him. FIND him! Track the money!"

"Tom, we'll never find him. A feller don't have only one chance for
such a pile--and that one's lost. I'd feel mighty shaky if I was to see
him, anyway."

"Well, so'd I; but I'd like to see him, anyway--and track him out--to
his Number Two."

"Number Two--yes, that's it. I been thinking 'bout that. But I can't
make nothing out of it. What do you reckon it is?"

"I dono. It's too deep. Say, Huck--maybe it's the number of a house!"

"Goody!... No, Tom, that ain't it. If it is, it ain't in this
one-horse town. They ain't no numbers here."

"Well, that's so. Lemme think a minute. Here--it's the number of a
room--in a tavern, you know!"

"Oh, that's the trick! They ain't only two taverns. We can find out
quick."

"You stay here, Huck, till I come."

Tom was off at once. He did not care to have Huck's company in public
places. He was gone half an hour. He found that in the best tavern, No.
2 had long been occupied by a young lawyer, and was still so occupied.
In the less ostentatious house, No. 2 was a mystery. The
tavern-keeper's young son said it was kept locked all the time, and he
never saw anybody go into it or come out of it except at night; he did
not know any particular reason for this state of things; had had some
little curiosity, but it was rather feeble; had made the most of the
mystery by entertaining himself with the idea that that room was
"ha'nted"; had noticed that there was a light in there the night before.

"That's what I've found out, Huck. I reckon that's the very No. 2
we're after."

"I reckon it is, Tom. Now what you going to do?"

"Lemme think."

Tom thought a long time. Then he said:

"I'll tell you. The back door of that No. 2 is the door that comes out
into that little close alley between the tavern and the old rattle trap
of a brick store. Now you get hold of all the door-keys you can find,
and I'll nip all of auntie's, and the first dark night we'll go there
and try 'em. And mind you, keep a lookout for Injun Joe, because he
said he was going to drop into town and spy around once more for a
chance to get his revenge. If you see him, you just follow him; and if
he don't go to that No. 2, that ain't the place."

"Lordy, I don't want to foller him by myself!"

"Why, it'll be night, sure. He mightn't ever see you--and if he did,
maybe he'd never think anything."

"Well, if it's pretty dark I reckon I'll track him. I dono--I dono.
I'll try."

"You bet I'll follow him, if it's dark, Huck. Why, he might 'a' found
out he couldn't get his revenge, and be going right after that money."

"It's so, Tom, it's so. I'll foller him; I will, by jingoes!"

"Now you're TALKING! Don't you ever weaken, Huck, and I won't."

CHAPTER XXVIII

THAT night Tom and Huck were ready for their adventure. They hung
about the neighborhood of the tavern until after nine, one watching the
alley at a distance and the other the tavern door. Nobody entered the
alley or left it; nobody resembling the Spaniard entered or left the
tavern door. The night promised to be a fair one; so Tom went home with
the understanding that if a considerable degree of darkness came on,
Huck was to come and "maow," whereupon he would slip out and try the
keys. But the night remained clear, and Huck closed his watch and
retired to bed in an empty sugar hogshead about twelve.

Tuesday the boys had the same ill luck. Also Wednesday. But Thursday
night promised better. Tom slipped out in good season with his aunt's
old tin lantern, and a large towel to blindfold it with. He hid the
lantern in Huck's sugar hogshead and the watch began. An hour before
midnight the tavern closed up and its lights (the only ones
thereabouts) were put out. No Spaniard had been seen. Nobody had
entered or left the alley. Everything was auspicious. The blackness of
darkness reigned, the perfect stillness was interrupted only by
occasional mutterings of distant thunder.

Tom got his lantern, lit it in the hogshead, wrapped it closely in the
towel, and the two adventurers crept in the gloom toward the tavern.
Huck stood sentry and Tom felt his way into the alley. Then there was a
season of waiting anxiety that weighed upon Huck's spirits like a
mountain. He began to wish he could see a flash from the lantern--it
would frighten him, but it would at least tell him that Tom was alive
yet. It seemed hours since Tom had disappeared. Surely he must have
fainted; maybe he was dead; maybe his heart had burst under terror and
excitement. In his uneasiness Huck found himself drawing closer and
closer to the alley; fearing all sorts of dreadful things, and
momentarily expecting some catastrophe to happen that would take away
his breath. There was not much to take away, for he seemed only able to
inhale it by thimblefuls, and his heart would soon wear itself out, the
way it was beating. Suddenly there was a flash of light and Tom came
tearing by him: "Run!" said he; "run, for your life!"

He needn't have repeated it; once was enough; Huck was making thirty
or forty miles an hour before the repetition was uttered. The boys
never stopped till they reached the shed of a deserted slaughter-house
at the lower end of the village. Just as they got within its shelter
the storm burst and the rain poured down. As soon as Tom got his breath
he said:

"Huck, it was awful! I tried two of the keys, just as soft as I could;
but they seemed to make such a power of racket that I couldn't hardly
get my breath I was so scared. They wouldn't turn in the lock, either.
Well, without noticing what I was doing, I took hold of the knob, and
open comes the door! It warn't locked! I hopped in, and shook off the
towel, and, GREAT CAESAR'S GHOST!"

"What!--what'd you see, Tom?"

"Huck, I most stepped onto Injun Joe's hand!"

"No!"

"Yes! He was lying there, sound asleep on the floor, with his old
patch on his eye and his arms spread out."

"Lordy, what did you do? Did he wake up?"

"No, never budged. Drunk, I reckon. I just grabbed that towel and
started!"

"I'd never 'a' thought of the towel, I bet!"

"Well, I would. My aunt would make me mighty sick if I lost it."

"Say, Tom, did you see that box?"

"Huck, I didn't wait to look around. I didn't see the box, I didn't
see the cross. I didn't see anything but a bottle and a tin cup on the
floor by Injun Joe; yes, I saw two barrels and lots more bottles in the
room. Don't you see, now, what's the matter with that ha'nted room?"

"How?"

"Why, it's ha'nted with whiskey! Maybe ALL the Temperance Taverns have
got a ha'nted room, hey, Huck?"

"Well, I reckon maybe that's so. Who'd 'a' thought such a thing? But
say, Tom, now's a mighty good time to get that box, if Injun Joe's
drunk."

"It is, that! You try it!"

Huck shuddered.

"Well, no--I reckon not."

"And I reckon not, Huck. Only one bottle alongside of Injun Joe ain't
enough. If there'd been three, he'd be drunk enough and I'd do it."

There was a long pause for reflection, and then Tom said:

"Lookyhere, Huck, less not try that thing any more till we know Injun
Joe's not in there. It's too scary. Now, if we watch every night, we'll
be dead sure to see him go out, some time or other, and then we'll
snatch that box quicker'n lightning."

"Well, I'm agreed. I'll watch the whole night long, and I'll do it
every night, too, if you'll do the other part of the job."

"All right, I will. All you got to do is to trot up Hooper Street a
block and maow--and if I'm asleep, you throw some gravel at the window
and that'll fetch me."

"Agreed, and good as wheat!"

"Now, Huck, the storm's over, and I'll go home. It'll begin to be
daylight in a couple of hours. You go back and watch that long, will
you?"

"I said I would, Tom, and I will. I'll ha'nt that tavern every night
for a year! I'll sleep all day and I'll stand watch all night."

"That's all right. Now, where you going to sleep?"

"In Ben Rogers' hayloft. He lets me, and so does his pap's nigger man,
Uncle Jake. I tote water for Uncle Jake whenever he wants me to, and
any time I ask him he gives me a little something to eat if he can
spare it. That's a mighty good nigger, Tom. He likes me, becuz I don't
ever act as if I was above him. Sometime I've set right down and eat
WITH him. But you needn't tell that. A body's got to do things when
he's awful hungry he wouldn't want to do as a steady thing."

"Well, if I don't want you in the daytime, I'll let you sleep. I won't
come bothering around. Any time you see something's up, in the night,
just skip right around and maow."

CHAPTER XXIX

THE first thing Tom heard on Friday morning was a glad piece of news
--Judge Thatcher's family had come back to town the night before. Both
Injun Joe and the treasure sunk into secondary importance for a moment,
and Becky took the chief place in the boy's interest. He saw her and
they had an exhausting good time playing "hi-spy" and "gully-keeper"
with a crowd of their school-mates. The day was completed and crowned
in a peculiarly satisfactory way: Becky teased her mother to appoint
the next day for the long-promised and long-delayed picnic, and she
consented. The child's delight was boundless; and Tom's not more
moderate. The invitations were sent out before sunset, and straightway
the young folks of the village were thrown into a fever of preparation
and pleasurable anticipation. Tom's excitement enabled him to keep
awake until a pretty late hour, and he had good hopes of hearing Huck's
"maow," and of having his treasure to astonish Becky and the picnickers
with, next day; but he was disappointed. No signal came that night.

Morning came, eventually, and by ten or eleven o'clock a giddy and
rollicking company were gathered at Judge Thatcher's, and everything
was ready for a start. It was not the custom for elderly people to mar
the picnics with their presence. The children were considered safe
enough under the wings of a few young ladies of eighteen and a few
young gentlemen of twenty-three or thereabouts. The old steam ferryboat
was chartered for the occasion; presently the gay throng filed up the
main street laden with provision-baskets. Sid was sick and had to miss
the fun; Mary remained at home to entertain him. The last thing Mrs.
Thatcher said to Becky, was:

"You'll not get back till late. Perhaps you'd better stay all night
with some of the girls that live near the ferry-landing, child."

"Then I'll stay with Susy Harper, mamma."

"Very well. And mind and behave yourself and don't be any trouble."

Presently, as they tripped along, Tom said to Becky:

"Say--I'll tell you what we'll do. 'Stead of going to Joe Harper's
we'll climb right up the hill and stop at the Widow Douglas'. She'll
have ice-cream! She has it most every day--dead loads of it. And she'll
be awful glad to have us."

"Oh, that will be fun!"

Then Becky reflected a moment and said:

"But what will mamma say?"

"How'll she ever know?"

The girl turned the idea over in her mind, and said reluctantly:

"I reckon it's wrong--but--"

"But shucks! Your mother won't know, and so what's the harm? All she
wants is that you'll be safe; and I bet you she'd 'a' said go there if
she'd 'a' thought of it. I know she would!"

The Widow Douglas' splendid hospitality was a tempting bait. It and
Tom's persuasions presently carried the day. So it was decided to say
nothing anybody about the night's programme. Presently it occurred to
Tom that maybe Huck might come this very night and give the signal. The
thought took a deal of the spirit out of his anticipations. Still he
could not bear to give up the fun at Widow Douglas'. And why should he
give it up, he reasoned--the signal did not come the night before, so
why should it be any more likely to come to-night? The sure fun of the
evening outweighed the uncertain treasure; and, boy-like, he determined
to yield to the stronger inclination and not allow himself to think of
the box of money another time that day.

Three miles below town the ferryboat stopped at the mouth of a woody
hollow and tied up. The crowd swarmed ashore and soon the forest
distances and craggy heights echoed far and near with shoutings and
laughter. All the different ways of getting hot and tired were gone
through with, and by-and-by the rovers straggled back to camp fortified
with responsible appetites, and then the destruction of the good things
began. After the feast there was a refreshing season of rest and chat
in the shade of spreading oaks. By-and-by somebody shouted:

"Who's ready for the cave?"

Everybody was. Bundles of candles were procured, and straightway there
was a general scamper up the hill. The mouth of the cave was up the
hillside--an opening shaped like a letter A. Its massive oaken door
stood unbarred. Within was a small chamber, chilly as an ice-house, and
walled by Nature with solid limestone that was dewy with a cold sweat.
It was romantic and mysterious to stand here in the deep gloom and look
out upon the green valley shining in the sun. But the impressiveness of
the situation quickly wore off, and the romping began again. The moment
a candle was lighted there was a general rush upon the owner of it; a
struggle and a gallant defence followed, but the candle was soon
knocked down or blown out, and then there was a glad clamor of laughter
and a new chase. But all things have an end. By-and-by the procession
went filing down the steep descent of the main avenue, the flickering
rank of lights dimly revealing the lofty walls of rock almost to their
point of junction sixty feet overhead. This main avenue was not more
than eight or ten feet wide. Every few steps other lofty and still
narrower crevices branched from it on either hand--for McDougal's cave
was but a vast labyrinth of crooked aisles that ran into each other and
out again and led nowhere. It was said that one might wander days and
nights together through its intricate tangle of rifts and chasms, and
never find the end of the cave; and that he might go down, and down,
and still down, into the earth, and it was just the same--labyrinth
under labyrinth, and no end to any of them. No man "knew" the cave.
That was an impossible thing. Most of the young men knew a portion of
it, and it was not customary to venture much beyond this known portion.
Tom Sawyer knew as much of the cave as any one.

The procession moved along the main avenue some three-quarters of a
mile, and then groups and couples began to slip aside into branch
avenues, fly along the dismal corridors, and take each other by
surprise at points where the corridors joined again. Parties were able
to elude each other for the space of half an hour without going beyond
the "known" ground.

By-and-by, one group after another came straggling back to the mouth
of the cave, panting, hilarious, smeared from head to foot with tallow
drippings, daubed with clay, and entirely delighted with the success of
the day. Then they were astonished to find that they had been taking no
note of time and that night was about at hand. The clanging bell had
been calling for half an hour. However, this sort of close to the day's
adventures was romantic and therefore satisfactory. When the ferryboat
with her wild freight pushed into the stream, nobody cared sixpence for
the wasted time but the captain of the craft.

Huck was already upon his watch when the ferryboat's lights went
glinting past the wharf. He heard no noise on board, for the young
people were as subdued and still as people usually are who are nearly
tired to death. He wondered what boat it was, and why she did not stop
at the wharf--and then he dropped her out of his mind and put his
attention upon his business. The night was growing cloudy and dark. Ten
o'clock came, and the noise of vehicles ceased, scattered lights began
to wink out, all straggling foot-passengers disappeared, the village
betook itself to its slumbers and left the small watcher alone with the
silence and the ghosts. Eleven o'clock came, and the tavern lights were
put out; darkness everywhere, now. Huck waited what seemed a weary long
time, but nothing happened. His faith was weakening. Was there any use?
Was there really any use? Why not give it up and turn in?

A noise fell upon his ear. He was all attention in an instant. The
alley door closed softly. He sprang to the corner of the brick store.
The next moment two men brushed by him, and one seemed to have
something under his arm. It must be that box! So they were going to
remove the treasure. Why call Tom now? It would be absurd--the men
would get away with the box and never be found again. No, he would
stick to their wake and follow them; he would trust to the darkness for
security from discovery. So communing with himself, Huck stepped out
and glided along behind the men, cat-like, with bare feet, allowing
them to keep just far enough ahead not to be invisible.

They moved up the river street three blocks, then turned to the left
up a cross-street. They went straight ahead, then, until they came to
the path that led up Cardiff Hill; this they took. They passed by the
old Welshman's house, half-way up the hill, without hesitating, and
still climbed upward. Good, thought Huck, they will bury it in the old
quarry. But they never stopped at the quarry. They passed on, up the
summit. They plunged into the narrow path between the tall sumach
bushes, and were at once hidden in the gloom. Huck closed up and
shortened his distance, now, for they would never be able to see him.
He trotted along awhile; then slackened his pace, fearing he was
gaining too fast; moved on a piece, then stopped altogether; listened;
no sound; none, save that he seemed to hear the beating of his own
heart. The hooting of an owl came over the hill--ominous sound! But no
footsteps. Heavens, was everything lost! He was about to spring with
winged feet, when a man cleared his throat not four feet from him!
Huck's heart shot into his throat, but he swallowed it again; and then
he stood there shaking as if a dozen agues had taken charge of him at
once, and so weak that he thought he must surely fall to the ground. He
knew where he was. He knew he was within five steps of the stile
leading into Widow Douglas' grounds. Very well, he thought, let them
bury it there; it won't be hard to find.

Now there was a voice--a very low voice--Injun Joe's:

"Damn her, maybe she's got company--there's lights, late as it is."

"I can't see any."

This was that stranger's voice--the stranger of the haunted house. A
deadly chill went to Huck's heart--this, then, was the "revenge" job!
His thought was, to fly. Then he remembered that the Widow Douglas had
been kind to him more than once, and maybe these men were going to
murder her. He wished he dared venture to warn her; but he knew he
didn't dare--they might come and catch him. He thought all this and
more in the moment that elapsed between the stranger's remark and Injun
Joe's next--which was--

"Because the bush is in your way. Now--this way--now you see, don't
you?"

"Yes. Well, there IS company there, I reckon. Better give it up."

"Give it up, and I just leaving this country forever! Give it up and
maybe never have another chance. I tell you again, as I've told you
before, I don't care for her swag--you may have it. But her husband was
rough on me--many times he was rough on me--and mainly he was the
justice of the peace that jugged me for a vagrant. And that ain't all.
It ain't a millionth part of it! He had me HORSEWHIPPED!--horsewhipped
in front of the jail, like a nigger!--with all the town looking on!
HORSEWHIPPED!--do you understand? He took advantage of me and died. But
I'll take it out of HER."

"Oh, don't kill her! Don't do that!"

"Kill? Who said anything about killing? I would kill HIM if he was
here; but not her. When you want to get revenge on a woman you don't
kill her--bosh! you go for her looks. You slit her nostrils--you notch
her ears like a sow!"

"By God, that's--"

"Keep your opinion to yourself! It will be safest for you. I'll tie
her to the bed. If she bleeds to death, is that my fault? I'll not cry,
if she does. My friend, you'll help me in this thing--for MY sake
--that's why you're here--I mightn't be able alone. If you flinch, I'll
kill you. Do you understand that? And if I have to kill you, I'll kill
her--and then I reckon nobody'll ever know much about who done this
business."

"Well, if it's got to be done, let's get at it. The quicker the
better--I'm all in a shiver."

"Do it NOW? And company there? Look here--I'll get suspicious of you,
first thing you know. No--we'll wait till the lights are out--there's
no hurry."

Huck felt that a silence was going to ensue--a thing still more awful
than any amount of murderous talk; so he held his breath and stepped
gingerly back; planted his foot carefully and firmly, after balancing,
one-legged, in a precarious way and almost toppling over, first on one
side and then on the other. He took another step back, with the same
elaboration and the same risks; then another and another, and--a twig
snapped under his foot! His breath stopped and he listened. There was
no sound--the stillness was perfect. His gratitude was measureless. Now
he turned in his tracks, between the walls of sumach bushes--turned
himself as carefully as if he were a ship--and then stepped quickly but
cautiously along. When he emerged at the quarry he felt secure, and so
he picked up his nimble heels and flew. Down, down he sped, till he
reached the Welshman's. He banged at the door, and presently the heads
of the old man and his two stalwart sons were thrust from windows.

"What's the row there? Who's banging? What do you want?"

"Let me in--quick! I'll tell everything."

"Why, who are you?"

"Huckleberry Finn--quick, let me in!"

"Huckleberry Finn, indeed! It ain't a name to open many doors, I
judge! But let him in, lads, and let's see what's the trouble."

"Please don't ever tell I told you," were Huck's first words when he
got in. "Please don't--I'd be killed, sure--but the widow's been good
friends to me sometimes, and I want to tell--I WILL tell if you'll
promise you won't ever say it was me."

"By George, he HAS got something to tell, or he wouldn't act so!"
exclaimed the old man; "out with it and nobody here'll ever tell, lad."

Three minutes later the old man and his sons, well armed, were up the
hill, and just entering the sumach path on tiptoe, their weapons in
their hands. Huck accompanied them no further. He hid behind a great
bowlder and fell to listening. There was a lagging, anxious silence,
and then all of a sudden there was an explosion of firearms and a cry.

Huck waited for no particulars. He sprang away and sped down the hill
as fast as his legs could carry him.

CHAPTER XXX

AS the earliest suspicion of dawn appeared on Sunday morning, Huck
came groping up the hill and rapped gently at the old Welshman's door.
The inmates were asleep, but it was a sleep that was set on a
hair-trigger, on account of the exciting episode of the night. A call
came from a window:

"Who's there!"

Huck's scared voice answered in a low tone:

"Please let me in! It's only Huck Finn!"

"It's a name that can open this door night or day, lad!--and welcome!"

These were strange words to the vagabond boy's ears, and the
pleasantest he had ever heard. He could not recollect that the closing
word had ever been applied in his case before. The door was quickly
unlocked, and he entered. Huck was given a seat and the old man and his
brace of tall sons speedily dressed themselves.

"Now, my boy, I hope you're good and hungry, because breakfast will be
ready as soon as the sun's up, and we'll have a piping hot one, too
--make yourself easy about that! I and the boys hoped you'd turn up and
stop here last night."

"I was awful scared," said Huck, "and I run. I took out when the
pistols went off, and I didn't stop for three mile. I've come now becuz
I wanted to know about it, you know; and I come before daylight becuz I
didn't want to run across them devils, even if they was dead."

"Well, poor chap, you do look as if you'd had a hard night of it--but
there's a bed here for you when you've had your breakfast. No, they
ain't dead, lad--we are sorry enough for that. You see we knew right
where to put our hands on them, by your description; so we crept along
on tiptoe till we got within fifteen feet of them--dark as a cellar
that sumach path was--and just then I found I was going to sneeze. It
was the meanest kind of luck! I tried to keep it back, but no use
--'twas bound to come, and it did come! I was in the lead with my pistol
raised, and when the sneeze started those scoundrels a-rustling to get
out of the path, I sung out, 'Fire boys!' and blazed away at the place
where the rustling was. So did the boys. But they were off in a jiffy,
those villains, and we after them, down through the woods. I judge we
never touched them. They fired a shot apiece as they started, but their
bullets whizzed by and didn't do us any harm. As soon as we lost the
sound of their feet we quit chasing, and went down and stirred up the
constables. They got a posse together, and went off to guard the river
bank, and as soon as it is light the sheriff and a gang are going to
beat up the woods. My boys will be with them presently. I wish we had
some sort of description of those rascals--'twould help a good deal.
But you couldn't see what they were like, in the dark, lad, I suppose?"

"Oh yes; I saw them down-town and follered them."

"Splendid! Describe them--describe them, my boy!"

"One's the old deaf and dumb Spaniard that's ben around here once or
twice, and t'other's a mean-looking, ragged--"

"That's enough, lad, we know the men! Happened on them in the woods
back of the widow's one day, and they slunk away. Off with you, boys,
and tell the sheriff--get your breakfast to-morrow morning!"

The Welshman's sons departed at once. As they were leaving the room
Huck sprang up and exclaimed:

"Oh, please don't tell ANYbody it was me that blowed on them! Oh,
please!"

"All right if you say it, Huck, but you ought to have the credit of
what you did."

"Oh no, no! Please don't tell!"

When the young men were gone, the old Welshman said:

"They won't tell--and I won't. But why don't you want it known?"

Huck would not explain, further than to say that he already knew too
much about one of those men and would not have the man know that he
knew anything against him for the whole world--he would be killed for
knowing it, sure.

The old man promised secrecy once more, and said:

"How did you come to follow these fellows, lad? Were they looking
suspicious?"

Huck was silent while he framed a duly cautious reply. Then he said:

"Well, you see, I'm a kind of a hard lot,--least everybody says so,
and I don't see nothing agin it--and sometimes I can't sleep much, on
account of thinking about it and sort of trying to strike out a new way
of doing. That was the way of it last night. I couldn't sleep, and so I
come along up-street 'bout midnight, a-turning it all over, and when I
got to that old shackly brick store by the Temperance Tavern, I backed
up agin the wall to have another think. Well, just then along comes
these two chaps slipping along close by me, with something under their
arm, and I reckoned they'd stole it. One was a-smoking, and t'other one
wanted a light; so they stopped right before me and the cigars lit up
their faces and I see that the big one was the deaf and dumb Spaniard,
by his white whiskers and the patch on his eye, and t'other one was a
rusty, ragged-looking devil."

"Could you see the rags by the light of the cigars?"

This staggered Huck for a moment. Then he said:

"Well, I don't know--but somehow it seems as if I did."

"Then they went on, and you--"

"Follered 'em--yes. That was it. I wanted to see what was up--they
sneaked along so. I dogged 'em to the widder's stile, and stood in the
dark and heard the ragged one beg for the widder, and the Spaniard
swear he'd spile her looks just as I told you and your two--"

"What! The DEAF AND DUMB man said all that!"

Huck had made another terrible mistake! He was trying his best to keep
the old man from getting the faintest hint of who the Spaniard might
be, and yet his tongue seemed determined to get him into trouble in
spite of all he could do. He made several efforts to creep out of his
scrape, but the old man's eye was upon him and he made blunder after
blunder. Presently the Welshman said:

"My boy, don't be afraid of me. I wouldn't hurt a hair of your head
for all the world. No--I'd protect you--I'd protect you. This Spaniard
is not deaf and dumb; you've let that slip without intending it; you
can't cover that up now. You know something about that Spaniard that
you want to keep dark. Now trust me--tell me what it is, and trust me
--I won't betray you."

Huck looked into the old man's honest eyes a moment, then bent over
and whispered in his ear:

"'Tain't a Spaniard--it's Injun Joe!"

The Welshman almost jumped out of his chair. In a moment he said:

"It's all plain enough, now. When you talked about notching ears and
slitting noses I judged that that was your own embellishment, because
white men don't take that sort of revenge. But an Injun! That's a
different matter altogether."

During breakfast the talk went on, and in the course of it the old man
said that the last thing which he and his sons had done, before going
to bed, was to get a lantern and examine the stile and its vicinity for
marks of blood. They found none, but captured a bulky bundle of--

"Of WHAT?"

If the words had been lightning they could not have leaped with a more
stunning suddenness from Huck's blanched lips. His eyes were staring
wide, now, and his breath suspended--waiting for the answer. The
Welshman started--stared in return--three seconds--five seconds--ten
--then replied:

"Of burglar's tools. Why, what's the MATTER with you?"

Huck sank back, panting gently, but deeply, unutterably grateful. The
Welshman eyed him gravely, curiously--and presently said:

"Yes, burglar's tools. That appears to relieve you a good deal. But
what did give you that turn? What were YOU expecting we'd found?"

Huck was in a close place--the inquiring eye was upon him--he would
have given anything for material for a plausible answer--nothing
suggested itself--the inquiring eye was boring deeper and deeper--a
senseless reply offered--there was no time to weigh it, so at a venture
he uttered it--feebly:

"Sunday-school books, maybe."

Poor Huck was too distressed to smile, but the old man laughed loud
and joyously, shook up the details of his anatomy from head to foot,
and ended by saying that such a laugh was money in a-man's pocket,
because it cut down the doctor's bill like everything. Then he added:

"Poor old chap, you're white and jaded--you ain't well a bit--no
wonder you're a little flighty and off your balance. But you'll come
out of it. Rest and sleep will fetch you out all right, I hope."

Huck was irritated to think he had been such a goose and betrayed such
a suspicious excitement, for he had dropped the idea that the parcel
brought from the tavern was the treasure, as soon as he had heard the
talk at the widow's stile. He had only thought it was not the treasure,
however--he had not known that it wasn't--and so the suggestion of a
captured bundle was too much for his self-possession. But on the whole
he felt glad the little episode had happened, for now he knew beyond
all question that that bundle was not THE bundle, and so his mind was
at rest and exceedingly comfortable. In fact, everything seemed to be
drifting just in the right direction, now; the treasure must be still
in No. 2, the men would be captured and jailed that day, and he and Tom
could seize the gold that night without any trouble or any fear of
interruption.

Just as breakfast was completed there was a knock at the door. Huck
jumped for a hiding-place, for he had no mind to be connected even
remotely with the late event. The Welshman admitted several ladies and
gentlemen, among them the Widow Douglas, and noticed that groups of
citizens were climbing up the hill--to stare at the stile. So the news
had spread. The Welshman had to tell the story of the night to the
visitors. The widow's gratitude for her preservation was outspoken.

"Don't say a word about it, madam. There's another that you're more
beholden to than you are to me and my boys, maybe, but he don't allow
me to tell his name. We wouldn't have been there but for him."

Of course this excited a curiosity so vast that it almost belittled
the main matter--but the Welshman allowed it to eat into the vitals of
his visitors, and through them be transmitted to the whole town, for he
refused to part with his secret. When all else had been learned, the
widow said:

"I went to sleep reading in bed and slept straight through all that
noise. Why didn't you come and wake me?"

"We judged it warn't worth while. Those fellows warn't likely to come
again--they hadn't any tools left to work with, and what was the use of
waking you up and scaring you to death? My three negro men stood guard
at your house all the rest of the night. They've just come back."

More visitors came, and the story had to be told and retold for a
couple of hours more.

There was no Sabbath-school during day-school vacation, but everybody
was early at church. The stirring event was well canvassed. News came
that not a sign of the two villains had been yet discovered. When the
sermon was finished, Judge Thatcher's wife dropped alongside of Mrs.
Harper as she moved down the aisle with the crowd and said:

"Is my Becky going to sleep all day? I just expected she would be
tired to death."

"Your Becky?"

"Yes," with a startled look--"didn't she stay with you last night?"

"Why, no."

Mrs. Thatcher turned pale, and sank into a pew, just as Aunt Polly,
talking briskly with a friend, passed by. Aunt Polly said:

"Good-morning, Mrs. Thatcher. Good-morning, Mrs. Harper. I've got a
boy that's turned up missing. I reckon my Tom stayed at your house last
night--one of you. And now he's afraid to come to church. I've got to
settle with him."

Mrs. Thatcher shook her head feebly and turned paler than ever.

"He didn't stay with us," said Mrs. Harper, beginning to look uneasy.
A marked anxiety came into Aunt Polly's face.

"Joe Harper, have you seen my Tom this morning?"

"No'm."

"When did you see him last?"

Joe tried to remember, but was not sure he could say. The people had
stopped moving out of church. Whispers passed along, and a boding
uneasiness took possession of every countenance. Children were
anxiously questioned, and young teachers. They all said they had not
noticed whether Tom and Becky were on board the ferryboat on the
homeward trip; it was dark; no one thought of inquiring if any one was
missing. One young man finally blurted out his fear that they were
still in the cave! Mrs. Thatcher swooned away. Aunt Polly fell to
crying and wringing her hands.

The alarm swept from lip to lip, from group to group, from street to
street, and within five minutes the bells were wildly clanging and the
whole town was up! The Cardiff Hill episode sank into instant
insignificance, the burglars were forgotten, horses were saddled,
skiffs were manned, the ferryboat ordered out, and before the horror
was half an hour old, two hundred men were pouring down highroad and
river toward the cave.

All the long afternoon the village seemed empty and dead. Many women
visited Aunt Polly and Mrs. Thatcher and tried to comfort them. They
cried with them, too, and that was still better than words. All the
tedious night the town waited for news; but when the morning dawned at
last, all the word that came was, "Send more candles--and send food."
Mrs. Thatcher was almost crazed; and Aunt Polly, also. Judge Thatcher
sent messages of hope and encouragement from the cave, but they
conveyed no real cheer.

The old Welshman came home toward daylight, spattered with
candle-grease, smeared with clay, and almost worn out. He found Huck
still in the bed that had been provided for him, and delirious with
fever. The physicians were all at the cave, so the Widow Douglas came
and took charge of the patient. She said she would do her best by him,
because, whether he was good, bad, or indifferent, he was the Lord's,
and nothing that was the Lord's was a thing to be neglected. The
Welshman said Huck had good spots in him, and the widow said:

"You can depend on it. That's the Lord's mark. He don't leave it off.
He never does. Puts it somewhere on every creature that comes from his
hands."

Early in the forenoon parties of jaded men began to straggle into the
village, but the strongest of the citizens continued searching. All the
news that could be gained was that remotenesses of the cavern were
being ransacked that had never been visited before; that every corner
and crevice was going to be thoroughly searched; that wherever one
wandered through the maze of passages, lights were to be seen flitting
hither and thither in the distance, and shoutings and pistol-shots sent
their hollow reverberations to the ear down the sombre aisles. In one
place, far from the section usually traversed by tourists, the names
"BECKY & TOM" had been found traced upon the rocky wall with
candle-smoke, and near at hand a grease-soiled bit of ribbon. Mrs.
Thatcher recognized the ribbon and cried over it. She said it was the
last relic she should ever have of her child; and that no other memorial
of her could ever be so precious, because this one parted latest from
the living body before the awful death came. Some said that now and
then, in the cave, a far-away speck of light would glimmer, and then a
glorious shout would burst forth and a score of men go trooping down the
echoing aisle--and then a sickening disappointment always followed; the
children were not there; it was only a searcher's light.

Three dreadful days and nights dragged their tedious hours along, and
the village sank into a hopeless stupor. No one had heart for anything.
The accidental discovery, just made, that the proprietor of the
Temperance Tavern kept liquor on his premises, scarcely fluttered the
public pulse, tremendous as the fact was. In a lucid interval, Huck
feebly led up to the subject of taverns, and finally asked--dimly
dreading the worst--if anything had been discovered at the Temperance
Tavern since he had been ill.

"Yes," said the widow.

Huck started up in bed, wild-eyed:

"What? What was it?"

"Liquor!--and the place has been shut up. Lie down, child--what a turn
you did give me!"

"Only tell me just one thing--only just one--please! Was it Tom Sawyer
that found it?"

The widow burst into tears. "Hush, hush, child, hush! I've told you
before, you must NOT talk. You are very, very sick!"

Then nothing but liquor had been found; there would have been a great
powwow if it had been the gold. So the treasure was gone forever--gone
forever! But what could she be crying about? Curious that she should
cry.

These thoughts worked their dim way through Huck's mind, and under the
weariness they gave him he fell asleep. The widow said to herself:

"There--he's asleep, poor wreck. Tom Sawyer find it! Pity but somebody
could find Tom Sawyer! Ah, there ain't many left, now, that's got hope
enough, or strength enough, either, to go on searching."

CHAPTER XXXI

NOW to return to Tom and Becky's share in the picnic. They tripped
along the murky aisles with the rest of the company, visiting the
familiar wonders of the cave--wonders dubbed with rather
over-descriptive names, such as "The Drawing-Room," "The Cathedral,"
"Aladdin's Palace," and so on. Presently the hide-and-seek frolicking
began, and Tom and Becky engaged in it with zeal until the exertion
began to grow a trifle wearisome; then they wandered down a sinuous
avenue holding their candles aloft and reading the tangled web-work of
names, dates, post-office addresses, and mottoes with which the rocky
walls had been frescoed (in candle-smoke). Still drifting along and
talking, they scarcely noticed that they were now in a part of the cave
whose walls were not frescoed. They smoked their own names under an
overhanging shelf and moved on. Presently they came to a place where a
little stream of water, trickling over a ledge and carrying a limestone
sediment with it, had, in the slow-dragging ages, formed a laced and
ruffled Niagara in gleaming and imperishable stone. Tom squeezed his
small body behind it in order to illuminate it for Becky's
gratification. He found that it curtained a sort of steep natural
stairway which was enclosed between narrow walls, and at once the
ambition to be a discoverer seized him. Becky responded to his call,
and they made a smoke-mark for future guidance, and started upon their
quest. They wound this way and that, far down into the secret depths of
the cave, made another mark, and branched off in search of novelties to
tell the upper world about. In one place they found a spacious cavern,
from whose ceiling depended a multitude of shining stalactites of the
length and circumference of a man's leg; they walked all about it,
wondering and admiring, and presently left it by one of the numerous
passages that opened into it. This shortly brought them to a bewitching
spring, whose basin was incrusted with a frostwork of glittering
crystals; it was in the midst of a cavern whose walls were supported by
many fantastic pillars which had been formed by the joining of great
stalactites and stalagmites together, the result of the ceaseless
water-drip of centuries. Under the roof vast knots of bats had packed
themselves together, thousands in a bunch; the lights disturbed the
creatures and they came flocking down by hundreds, squeaking and
darting furiously at the candles. Tom knew their ways and the danger of
this sort of conduct. He seized Becky's hand and hurried her into the
first corridor that offered; and none too soon, for a bat struck
Becky's light out with its wing while she was passing out of the
cavern. The bats chased the children a good distance; but the fugitives
plunged into every new passage that offered, and at last got rid of the
perilous things. Tom found a subterranean lake, shortly, which
stretched its dim length away until its shape was lost in the shadows.
He wanted to explore its borders, but concluded that it would be best
to sit down and rest awhile, first. Now, for the first time, the deep
stillness of the place laid a clammy hand upon the spirits of the
children. Becky said:

"Why, I didn't notice, but it seems ever so long since I heard any of
the others."

"Come to think, Becky, we are away down below them--and I don't know
how far away north, or south, or east, or whichever it is. We couldn't
hear them here."

Becky grew apprehensive.

"I wonder how long we've been down here, Tom? We better start back."

"Yes, I reckon we better. P'raps we better."

"Can you find the way, Tom? It's all a mixed-up crookedness to me."

"I reckon I could find it--but then the bats. If they put our candles
out it will be an awful fix. Let's try some other way, so as not to go
through there."

"Well. But I hope we won't get lost. It would be so awful!" and the
girl shuddered at the thought of the dreadful possibilities.

They started through a corridor, and traversed it in silence a long
way, glancing at each new opening, to see if there was anything
familiar about the look of it; but they were all strange. Every time
Tom made an examination, Becky would watch his face for an encouraging
sign, and he would say cheerily:

"Oh, it's all right. This ain't the one, but we'll come to it right
away!"

But he felt less and less hopeful with each failure, and presently
began to turn off into diverging avenues at sheer random, in desperate
hope of finding the one that was wanted. He still said it was "all
right," but there was such a leaden dread at his heart that the words
had lost their ring and sounded just as if he had said, "All is lost!"
Becky clung to his side in an anguish of fear, and tried hard to keep
back the tears, but they would come. At last she said:

"Oh, Tom, never mind the bats, let's go back that way! We seem to get
worse and worse off all the time."

"Listen!" said he.

Profound silence; silence so deep that even their breathings were
conspicuous in the hush. Tom shouted. The call went echoing down the
empty aisles and died out in the distance in a faint sound that
resembled a ripple of mocking laughter.

"Oh, don't do it again, Tom, it is too horrid," said Becky.

"It is horrid, but I better, Becky; they might hear us, you know," and
he shouted again.

The "might" was even a chillier horror than the ghostly laughter, it
so confessed a perishing hope. The children stood still and listened;
but there was no result. Tom turned upon the back track at once, and
hurried his steps. It was but a little while before a certain
indecision in his manner revealed another fearful fact to Becky--he
could not find his way back!

"Oh, Tom, you didn't make any marks!"

"Becky, I was such a fool! Such a fool! I never thought we might want
to come back! No--I can't find the way. It's all mixed up."

"Tom, Tom, we're lost! we're lost! We never can get out of this awful
place! Oh, why DID we ever leave the others!"

She sank to the ground and burst into such a frenzy of crying that Tom
was appalled with the idea that she might die, or lose her reason. He
sat down by her and put his arms around her; she buried her face in his
bosom, she clung to him, she poured out her terrors, her unavailing
regrets, and the far echoes turned them all to jeering laughter. Tom
begged her to pluck up hope again, and she said she could not. He fell
to blaming and abusing himself for getting her into this miserable
situation; this had a better effect. She said she would try to hope
again, she would get up and follow wherever he might lead if only he
would not talk like that any more. For he was no more to blame than
she, she said.

So they moved on again--aimlessly--simply at random--all they could do
was to move, keep moving. For a little while, hope made a show of
reviving--not with any reason to back it, but only because it is its
nature to revive when the spring has not been taken out of it by age
and familiarity with failure.

By-and-by Tom took Becky's candle and blew it out. This economy meant
so much! Words were not needed. Becky understood, and her hope died
again. She knew that Tom had a whole candle and three or four pieces in
his pockets--yet he must economize.

By-and-by, fatigue began to assert its claims; the children tried to
pay attention, for it was dreadful to think of sitting down when time
was grown to be so precious, moving, in some direction, in any
direction, was at least progress and might bear fruit; but to sit down
was to invite death and shorten its pursuit.

At last Becky's frail limbs refused to carry her farther. She sat
down. Tom rested with her, and they talked of home, and the friends
there, and the comfortable beds and, above all, the light! Becky cried,
and Tom tried to think of some way of comforting her, but all his
encouragements were grown threadbare with use, and sounded like
sarcasms. Fatigue bore so heavily upon Becky that she drowsed off to
sleep. Tom was grateful. He sat looking into her drawn face and saw it
grow smooth and natural under the influence of pleasant dreams; and
by-and-by a smile dawned and rested there. The peaceful face reflected
somewhat of peace and healing into his own spirit, and his thoughts
wandered away to bygone times and dreamy memories. While he was deep in
his musings, Becky woke up with a breezy little laugh--but it was
stricken dead upon her lips, and a groan followed it.

"Oh, how COULD I sleep! I wish I never, never had waked! No! No, I
don't, Tom! Don't look so! I won't say it again."

"I'm glad you've slept, Becky; you'll feel rested, now, and we'll find
the way out."

"We can try, Tom; but I've seen such a beautiful country in my dream.
I reckon we are going there."

"Maybe not, maybe not. Cheer up, Becky, and let's go on trying."

They rose up and wandered along, hand in hand and hopeless. They tried
to estimate how long they had been in the cave, but all they knew was
that it seemed days and weeks, and yet it was plain that this could not
be, for their candles were not gone yet. A long time after this--they
could not tell how long--Tom said they must go softly and listen for
dripping water--they must find a spring. They found one presently, and
Tom said it was time to rest again. Both were cruelly tired, yet Becky
said she thought she could go a little farther. She was surprised to
hear Tom dissent. She could not understand it. They sat down, and Tom
fastened his candle to the wall in front of them with some clay.
Thought was soon busy; nothing was said for some time. Then Becky broke
the silence:

"Tom, I am so hungry!"

Tom took something out of his pocket.

"Do you remember this?" said he.

Becky almost smiled.

"It's our wedding-cake, Tom."

"Yes--I wish it was as big as a barrel, for it's all we've got."

"I saved it from the picnic for us to dream on, Tom, the way grown-up
people do with wedding-cake--but it'll be our--"

She dropped the sentence where it was. Tom divided the cake and Becky
ate with good appetite, while Tom nibbled at his moiety. There was
abundance of cold water to finish the feast with. By-and-by Becky
suggested that they move on again. Tom was silent a moment. Then he
said:

"Becky, can you bear it if I tell you something?"

Becky's face paled, but she thought she could.

"Well, then, Becky, we must stay here, where there's water to drink.
That little piece is our last candle!"

Becky gave loose to tears and wailings. Tom did what he could to
comfort her, but with little effect. At length Becky said:

"Tom!"

"Well, Becky?"

"They'll miss us and hunt for us!"

"Yes, they will! Certainly they will!"

"Maybe they're hunting for us now, Tom."

"Why, I reckon maybe they are. I hope they are."

"When would they miss us, Tom?"

"When they get back to the boat, I reckon."

"Tom, it might be dark then--would they notice we hadn't come?"

"I don't know. But anyway, your mother would miss you as soon as they
got home."

A frightened look in Becky's face brought Tom to his senses and he saw
that he had made a blunder. Becky was not to have gone home that night!
The children became silent and thoughtful. In a moment a new burst of
grief from Becky showed Tom that the thing in his mind had struck hers
also--that the Sabbath morning might be half spent before Mrs. Thatcher
discovered that Becky was not at Mrs. Harper's.

The children fastened their eyes upon their bit of candle and watched
it melt slowly and pitilessly away; saw the half inch of wick stand
alone at last; saw the feeble flame rise and fall, climb the thin
column of smoke, linger at its top a moment, and then--the horror of
utter darkness reigned!

How long afterward it was that Becky came to a slow consciousness that
she was crying in Tom's arms, neither could tell. All that they knew
was, that after what seemed a mighty stretch of time, both awoke out of
a dead stupor of sleep and resumed their miseries once more. Tom said
it might be Sunday, now--maybe Monday. He tried to get Becky to talk,
but her sorrows were too oppressive, all her hopes were gone. Tom said
that they must have been missed long ago, and no doubt the search was
going on. He would shout and maybe some one would come. He tried it;
but in the darkness the distant echoes sounded so hideously that he
tried it no more.

The hours wasted away, and hunger came to torment the captives again.
A portion of Tom's half of the cake was left; they divided and ate it.
But they seemed hungrier than before. The poor morsel of food only
whetted desire.

By-and-by Tom said:

"SH! Did you hear that?"

Both held their breath and listened. There was a sound like the
faintest, far-off shout. Instantly Tom answered it, and leading Becky
by the hand, started groping down the corridor in its direction.
Presently he listened again; again the sound was heard, and apparently
a little nearer.

"It's them!" said Tom; "they're coming! Come along, Becky--we're all
right now!"

The joy of the prisoners was almost overwhelming. Their speed was
slow, however, because pitfalls were somewhat common, and had to be
guarded against. They shortly came to one and had to stop. It might be
three feet deep, it might be a hundred--there was no passing it at any
rate. Tom got down on his breast and reached as far down as he could.
No bottom. They must stay there and wait until the searchers came. They
listened; evidently the distant shoutings were growing more distant! a
moment or two more and they had gone altogether. The heart-sinking
misery of it! Tom whooped until he was hoarse, but it was of no use. He
talked hopefully to Becky; but an age of anxious waiting passed and no
sounds came again.

The children groped their way back to the spring. The weary time
dragged on; they slept again, and awoke famished and woe-stricken. Tom
believed it must be Tuesday by this time.

Now an idea struck him. There were some side passages near at hand. It
would be better to explore some of these than bear the weight of the
heavy time in idleness. He took a kite-line from his pocket, tied it to
a projection, and he and Becky started, Tom in the lead, unwinding the
line as he groped along. At the end of twenty steps the corridor ended
in a "jumping-off place." Tom got down on his knees and felt below, and
then as far around the corner as he could reach with his hands
conveniently; he made an effort to stretch yet a little farther to the
right, and at that moment, not twenty yards away, a human hand, holding
a candle, appeared from behind a rock! Tom lifted up a glorious shout,
and instantly that hand was followed by the body it belonged to--Injun
Joe's! Tom was paralyzed; he could not move. He was vastly gratified
the next moment, to see the "Spaniard" take to his heels and get
himself out of sight. Tom wondered that Joe had not recognized his
voice and come over and killed him for testifying in court. But the
echoes must have disguised the voice. Without doubt, that was it, he
reasoned. Tom's fright weakened every muscle in his body. He said to
himself that if he had strength enough to get back to the spring he
would stay there, and nothing should tempt him to run the risk of
meeting Injun Joe again. He was careful to keep from Becky what it was
he had seen. He told her he had only shouted "for luck."

But hunger and wretchedness rise superior to fears in the long run.
Another tedious wait at the spring and another long sleep brought
changes. The children awoke tortured with a raging hunger. Tom believed
that it must be Wednesday or Thursday or even Friday or Saturday, now,
and that the search had been given over. He proposed to explore another
passage. He felt willing to risk Injun Joe and all other terrors. But
Becky was very weak. She had sunk into a dreary apathy and would not be
roused. She said she would wait, now, where she was, and die--it would
not be long. She told Tom to go with the kite-line and explore if he
chose; but she implored him to come back every little while and speak
to her; and she made him promise that when the awful time came, he
would stay by her and hold her hand until all was over.

Tom kissed her, with a choking sensation in his throat, and made a
show of being confident of finding the searchers or an escape from the
cave; then he took the kite-line in his hand and went groping down one
of the passages on his hands and knees, distressed with hunger and sick
with bodings of coming doom.

CHAPTER XXXII

TUESDAY afternoon came, and waned to the twilight. The village of St.
Petersburg still mourned. The lost children had not been found. Public
prayers had been offered up for them, and many and many a private
prayer that had the petitioner's whole heart in it; but still no good
news came from the cave. The majority of the searchers had given up the
quest and gone back to their daily avocations, saying that it was plain
the children could never be found. Mrs. Thatcher was very ill, and a
great part of the time delirious. People said it was heartbreaking to
hear her call her child, and raise her head and listen a whole minute
at a time, then lay it wearily down again with a moan. Aunt Polly had
drooped into a settled melancholy, and her gray hair had grown almost
white. The village went to its rest on Tuesday night, sad and forlorn.

Away in the middle of the night a wild peal burst from the village
bells, and in a moment the streets were swarming with frantic half-clad
people, who shouted, "Turn out! turn out! they're found! they're
found!" Tin pans and horns were added to the din, the population massed
itself and moved toward the river, met the children coming in an open
carriage drawn by shouting citizens, thronged around it, joined its
homeward march, and swept magnificently up the main street roaring
huzzah after huzzah!

The village was illuminated; nobody went to bed again; it was the
greatest night the little town had ever seen. During the first half-hour
a procession of villagers filed through Judge Thatcher's house, seized
the saved ones and kissed them, squeezed Mrs. Thatcher's hand, tried to
speak but couldn't--and drifted out raining tears all over the place.

Aunt Polly's happiness was complete, and Mrs. Thatcher's nearly so. It
would be complete, however, as soon as the messenger dispatched with
the great news to the cave should get the word to her husband. Tom lay
upon a sofa with an eager auditory about him and told the history of
the wonderful adventure, putting in many striking additions to adorn it
withal; and closed with a description of how he left Becky and went on
an exploring expedition; how he followed two avenues as far as his
kite-line would reach; how he followed a third to the fullest stretch of
the kite-line, and was about to turn back when he glimpsed a far-off
speck that looked like daylight; dropped the line and groped toward it,
pushed his head and shoulders through a small hole, and saw the broad
Mississippi rolling by! And if it had only happened to be night he would
not have seen that speck of daylight and would not have explored that
passage any more! He told how he went back for Becky and broke the good
news and she told him not to fret her with such stuff, for she was
tired, and knew she was going to die, and wanted to. He described how he
labored with her and convinced her; and how she almost died for joy when
she had groped to where she actually saw the blue speck of daylight; how
he pushed his way out at the hole and then helped her out; how they sat
there and cried for gladness; how some men came along in a skiff and Tom
hailed them and told them their situation and their famished condition;
how the men didn't believe the wild tale at first, "because," said they,
"you are five miles down the river below the valley the cave is in"
--then took them aboard, rowed to a house, gave them supper, made them
rest till two or three hours after dark and then brought them home.

Before day-dawn, Judge Thatcher and the handful of searchers with him
were tracked out, in the cave, by the twine clews they had strung
behind them, and informed of the great news.

Three days and nights of toil and hunger in the cave were not to be
shaken off at once, as Tom and Becky soon discovered. They were
bedridden all of Wednesday and Thursday, and seemed to grow more and
more tired and worn, all the time. Tom got about, a little, on
Thursday, was down-town Friday, and nearly as whole as ever Saturday;
but Becky did not leave her room until Sunday, and then she looked as
if she had passed through a wasting illness.

Tom learned of Huck's sickness and went to see him on Friday, but
could not be admitted to the bedroom; neither could he on Saturday or
Sunday. He was admitted daily after that, but was warned to keep still
about his adventure and introduce no exciting topic. The Widow Douglas
stayed by to see that he obeyed. At home Tom learned of the Cardiff
Hill event; also that the "ragged man's" body had eventually been found
in the river near the ferry-landing; he had been drowned while trying
to escape, perhaps.

About a fortnight after Tom's rescue from the cave, he started off to
visit Huck, who had grown plenty strong enough, now, to hear exciting
talk, and Tom had some that would interest him, he thought. Judge
Thatcher's house was on Tom's way, and he stopped to see Becky. The
Judge and some friends set Tom to talking, and some one asked him
ironically if he wouldn't like to go to the cave again. Tom said he
thought he wouldn't mind it. The Judge said:

"Well, there are others just like you, Tom, I've not the least doubt.
But we have taken care of that. Nobody will get lost in that cave any
more."

"Why?"

"Because I had its big door sheathed with boiler iron two weeks ago,
and triple-locked--and I've got the keys."

Tom turned as white as a sheet.

"What's the matter, boy! Here, run, somebody! Fetch a glass of water!"

The water was brought and thrown into Tom's face.

"Ah, now you're all right. What was the matter with you, Tom?"

"Oh, Judge, Injun Joe's in the cave!"

CHAPTER XXXIII

WITHIN a few minutes the news had spread, and a dozen skiff-loads of
men were on their way to McDougal's cave, and the ferryboat, well
filled with passengers, soon followed. Tom Sawyer was in the skiff that
bore Judge Thatcher.

When the cave door was unlocked, a sorrowful sight presented itself in
the dim twilight of the place. Injun Joe lay stretched upon the ground,
dead, with his face close to the crack of the door, as if his longing
eyes had been fixed, to the latest moment, upon the light and the cheer
of the free world outside. Tom was touched, for he knew by his own
experience how this wretch had suffered. His pity was moved, but
nevertheless he felt an abounding sense of relief and security, now,
which revealed to him in a degree which he had not fully appreciated
before how vast a weight of dread had been lying upon him since the day
he lifted his voice against this bloody-minded outcast.

Injun Joe's bowie-knife lay close by, its blade broken in two. The
great foundation-beam of the door had been chipped and hacked through,
with tedious labor; useless labor, too, it was, for the native rock
formed a sill outside it, and upon that stubborn material the knife had
wrought no effect; the only damage done was to the knife itself. But if
there had been no stony obstruction there the labor would have been
useless still, for if the beam had been wholly cut away Injun Joe could
not have squeezed his body under the door, and he knew it. So he had
only hacked that place in order to be doing something--in order to pass
the weary time--in order to employ his tortured faculties. Ordinarily
one could find half a dozen bits of candle stuck around in the crevices
of this vestibule, left there by tourists; but there were none now. The
prisoner had searched them out and eaten them. He had also contrived to
catch a few bats, and these, also, he had eaten, leaving only their
claws. The poor unfortunate had starved to death. In one place, near at
hand, a stalagmite had been slowly growing up from the ground for ages,
builded by the water-drip from a stalactite overhead. The captive had
broken off the stalagmite, and upon the stump had placed a stone,
wherein he had scooped a shallow hollow to catch the precious drop
that fell once in every three minutes with the dreary regularity of a
clock-tick--a dessertspoonful once in four and twenty hours. That drop
was falling when the Pyramids were new; when Troy fell; when the
foundations of Rome were laid when Christ was crucified; when the
Conqueror created the British empire; when Columbus sailed; when the
massacre at Lexington was "news." It is falling now; it will still be
falling when all these things shall have sunk down the afternoon of
history, and the twilight of tradition, and been swallowed up in the
thick night of oblivion. Has everything a purpose and a mission? Did
this drop fall patiently during five thousand years to be ready for
this flitting human insect's need? and has it another important object
to accomplish ten thousand years to come? No matter. It is many and
many a year since the hapless half-breed scooped out the stone to catch
the priceless drops, but to this day the tourist stares longest at that
pathetic stone and that slow-dropping water when he comes to see the
wonders of McDougal's cave. Injun Joe's cup stands first in the list of
the cavern's marvels; even "Aladdin's Palace" cannot rival it.

Injun Joe was buried near the mouth of the cave; and people flocked
there in boats and wagons from the towns and from all the farms and
hamlets for seven miles around; they brought their children, and all
sorts of provisions, and confessed that they had had almost as
satisfactory a time at the funeral as they could have had at the
hanging.

This funeral stopped the further growth of one thing--the petition to
the governor for Injun Joe's pardon. The petition had been largely
signed; many tearful and eloquent meetings had been held, and a
committee of sappy women been appointed to go in deep mourning and wail
around the governor, and implore him to be a merciful ass and trample
his duty under foot. Injun Joe was believed to have killed five
citizens of the village, but what of that? If he had been Satan himself
there would have been plenty of weaklings ready to scribble their names
to a pardon-petition, and drip a tear on it from their permanently
impaired and leaky water-works.

The morning after the funeral Tom took Huck to a private place to have
an important talk. Huck had learned all about Tom's adventure from the
Welshman and the Widow Douglas, by this time, but Tom said he reckoned
there was one thing they had not told him; that thing was what he
wanted to talk about now. Huck's face saddened. He said:

"I know what it is. You got into No. 2 and never found anything but
whiskey. Nobody told me it was you; but I just knowed it must 'a' ben
you, soon as I heard 'bout that whiskey business; and I knowed you
hadn't got the money becuz you'd 'a' got at me some way or other and
told me even if you was mum to everybody else. Tom, something's always
told me we'd never get holt of that swag."

"Why, Huck, I never told on that tavern-keeper. YOU know his tavern
was all right the Saturday I went to the picnic. Don't you remember you
was to watch there that night?"

"Oh yes! Why, it seems 'bout a year ago. It was that very night that I
follered Injun Joe to the widder's."

"YOU followed him?"

"Yes--but you keep mum. I reckon Injun Joe's left friends behind him,
and I don't want 'em souring on me and doing me mean tricks. If it
hadn't ben for me he'd be down in Texas now, all right."

Then Huck told his entire adventure in confidence to Tom, who had only
heard of the Welshman's part of it before.

"Well," said Huck, presently, coming back to the main question,
"whoever nipped the whiskey in No. 2, nipped the money, too, I reckon
--anyways it's a goner for us, Tom."

"Huck, that money wasn't ever in No. 2!"

"What!" Huck searched his comrade's face keenly. "Tom, have you got on
the track of that money again?"

"Huck, it's in the cave!"

Huck's eyes blazed.

"Say it again, Tom."

"The money's in the cave!"

"Tom--honest injun, now--is it fun, or earnest?"

"Earnest, Huck--just as earnest as ever I was in my life. Will you go
in there with me and help get it out?"

"I bet I will! I will if it's where we can blaze our way to it and not
get lost."

"Huck, we can do that without the least little bit of trouble in the
world."

"Good as wheat! What makes you think the money's--"

"Huck, you just wait till we get in there. If we don't find it I'll
agree to give you my drum and every thing I've got in the world. I
will, by jings."

"All right--it's a whiz. When do you say?"

"Right now, if you say it. Are you strong enough?"

"Is it far in the cave? I ben on my pins a little, three or four days,
now, but I can't walk more'n a mile, Tom--least I don't think I could."

"It's about five mile into there the way anybody but me would go,
Huck, but there's a mighty short cut that they don't anybody but me
know about. Huck, I'll take you right to it in a skiff. I'll float the
skiff down there, and I'll pull it back again all by myself. You
needn't ever turn your hand over."

"Less start right off, Tom."

"All right. We want some bread and meat, and our pipes, and a little
bag or two, and two or three kite-strings, and some of these
new-fangled things they call lucifer matches. I tell you, many's
the time I wished I had some when I was in there before."

A trifle after noon the boys borrowed a small skiff from a citizen who
was absent, and got under way at once. When they were several miles
below "Cave Hollow," Tom said:

"Now you see this bluff here looks all alike all the way down from the
cave hollow--no houses, no wood-yards, bushes all alike. But do you see
that white place up yonder where there's been a landslide? Well, that's
one of my marks. We'll get ashore, now."

They landed.

"Now, Huck, where we're a-standing you could touch that hole I got out
of with a fishing-pole. See if you can find it."

Huck searched all the place about, and found nothing. Tom proudly
marched into a thick clump of sumach bushes and said:

"Here you are! Look at it, Huck; it's the snuggest hole in this
country. You just keep mum about it. All along I've been wanting to be
a robber, but I knew I'd got to have a thing like this, and where to
run across it was the bother. We've got it now, and we'll keep it
quiet, only we'll let Joe Harper and Ben Rogers in--because of course
there's got to be a Gang, or else there wouldn't be any style about it.
Tom Sawyer's Gang--it sounds splendid, don't it, Huck?"

"Well, it just does, Tom. And who'll we rob?"

"Oh, most anybody. Waylay people--that's mostly the way."

"And kill them?"

"No, not always. Hive them in the cave till they raise a ransom."

"What's a ransom?"

"Money. You make them raise all they can, off'n their friends; and
after you've kept them a year, if it ain't raised then you kill them.
That's the general way. Only you don't kill the women. You shut up the
women, but you don't kill them. They're always beautiful and rich, and
awfully scared. You take their watches and things, but you always take
your hat off and talk polite. They ain't anybody as polite as robbers
--you'll see that in any book. Well, the women get to loving you, and
after they've been in the cave a week or two weeks they stop crying and
after that you couldn't get them to leave. If you drove them out they'd
turn right around and come back. It's so in all the books."

"Why, it's real bully, Tom. I believe it's better'n to be a pirate."

"Yes, it's better in some ways, because it's close to home and
circuses and all that."

By this time everything was ready and the boys entered the hole, Tom
in the lead. They toiled their way to the farther end of the tunnel,
then made their spliced kite-strings fast and moved on. A few steps
brought them to the spring, and Tom felt a shudder quiver all through
him. He showed Huck the fragment of candle-wick perched on a lump of
clay against the wall, and described how he and Becky had watched the
flame struggle and expire.

The boys began to quiet down to whispers, now, for the stillness and
gloom of the place oppressed their spirits. They went on, and presently
entered and followed Tom's other corridor until they reached the
"jumping-off place." The candles revealed the fact that it was not
really a precipice, but only a steep clay hill twenty or thirty feet
high. Tom whispered:

"Now I'll show you something, Huck."

He held his candle aloft and said:

"Look as far around the corner as you can. Do you see that? There--on
the big rock over yonder--done with candle-smoke."

"Tom, it's a CROSS!"

"NOW where's your Number Two? 'UNDER THE CROSS,' hey? Right yonder's
where I saw Injun Joe poke up his candle, Huck!"

Huck stared at the mystic sign awhile, and then said with a shaky voice:

"Tom, less git out of here!"

"What! and leave the treasure?"

"Yes--leave it. Injun Joe's ghost is round about there, certain."

"No it ain't, Huck, no it ain't. It would ha'nt the place where he
died--away out at the mouth of the cave--five mile from here."

"No, Tom, it wouldn't. It would hang round the money. I know the ways
of ghosts, and so do you."

Tom began to fear that Huck was right. Misgivings gathered in his
mind. But presently an idea occurred to him--

"Lookyhere, Huck, what fools we're making of ourselves! Injun Joe's
ghost ain't a going to come around where there's a cross!"

The point was well taken. It had its effect.

"Tom, I didn't think of that. But that's so. It's luck for us, that
cross is. I reckon we'll climb down there and have a hunt for that box."

Tom went first, cutting rude steps in the clay hill as he descended.
Huck followed. Four avenues opened out of the small cavern which the
great rock stood in. The boys examined three of them with no result.
They found a small recess in the one nearest the base of the rock, with
a pallet of blankets spread down in it; also an old suspender, some
bacon rind, and the well-gnawed bones of two or three fowls. But there
was no money-box. The lads searched and researched this place, but in
vain. Tom said:

"He said UNDER the cross. Well, this comes nearest to being under the
cross. It can't be under the rock itself, because that sets solid on
the ground."

They searched everywhere once more, and then sat down discouraged.
Huck could suggest nothing. By-and-by Tom said:

"Lookyhere, Huck, there's footprints and some candle-grease on the
clay about one side of this rock, but not on the other sides. Now,
what's that for? I bet you the money IS under the rock. I'm going to
dig in the clay."

"That ain't no bad notion, Tom!" said Huck with animation.

Tom's "real Barlow" was out at once, and he had not dug four inches
before he struck wood.

"Hey, Huck!--you hear that?"

Huck began to dig and scratch now. Some boards were soon uncovered and
removed. They had concealed a natural chasm which led under the rock.
Tom got into this and held his candle as far under the rock as he
could, but said he could not see to the end of the rift. He proposed to
explore. He stooped and passed under; the narrow way descended
gradually. He followed its winding course, first to the right, then to
the left, Huck at his heels. Tom turned a short curve, by-and-by, and
exclaimed:

"My goodness, Huck, lookyhere!"

It was the treasure-box, sure enough, occupying a snug little cavern,
along with an empty powder-keg, a couple of guns in leather cases, two
or three pairs of old moccasins, a leather belt, and some other rubbish
well soaked with the water-drip.

"Got it at last!" said Huck, ploughing among the tarnished coins with
his hand. "My, but we're rich, Tom!"

"Huck, I always reckoned we'd get it. It's just too good to believe,
but we HAVE got it, sure! Say--let's not fool around here. Let's snake
it out. Lemme see if I can lift the box."

It weighed about fifty pounds. Tom could lift it, after an awkward
fashion, but could not carry it conveniently.

"I thought so," he said; "THEY carried it like it was heavy, that day
at the ha'nted house. I noticed that. I reckon I was right to think of
fetching the little bags along."

The money was soon in the bags and the boys took it up to the cross
rock.

"Now less fetch the guns and things," said Huck.

"No, Huck--leave them there. They're just the tricks to have when we
go to robbing. We'll keep them there all the time, and we'll hold our
orgies there, too. It's an awful snug place for orgies."

"What orgies?"

"I dono. But robbers always have orgies, and of course we've got to
have them, too. Come along, Huck, we've been in here a long time. It's
getting late, I reckon. I'm hungry, too. We'll eat and smoke when we
get to the skiff."

They presently emerged into the clump of sumach bushes, looked warily
out, found the coast clear, and were soon lunching and smoking in the
skiff. As the sun dipped toward the horizon they pushed out and got
under way. Tom skimmed up the shore through the long twilight, chatting
cheerily with Huck, and landed shortly after dark.

"Now, Huck," said Tom, "we'll hide the money in the loft of the
widow's woodshed, and I'll come up in the morning and we'll count it
and divide, and then we'll hunt up a place out in the woods for it
where it will be safe. Just you lay quiet here and watch the stuff till
I run and hook Benny Taylor's little wagon; I won't be gone a minute."

He disappeared, and presently returned with the wagon, put the two
small sacks into it, threw some old rags on top of them, and started
off, dragging his cargo behind him. When the boys reached the
Welshman's house, they stopped to rest. Just as they were about to move
on, the Welshman stepped out and said:

"Hallo, who's that?"

"Huck and Tom Sawyer."

"Good! Come along with me, boys, you are keeping everybody waiting.
Here--hurry up, trot ahead--I'll haul the wagon for you. Why, it's not
as light as it might be. Got bricks in it?--or old metal?"

"Old metal," said Tom.

"I judged so; the boys in this town will take more trouble and fool
away more time hunting up six bits' worth of old iron to sell to the
foundry than they would to make twice the money at regular work. But
that's human nature--hurry along, hurry along!"

The boys wanted to know what the hurry was about.

"Never mind; you'll see, when we get to the Widow Douglas'."

Huck said with some apprehension--for he was long used to being
falsely accused:

"Mr. Jones, we haven't been doing nothing."

The Welshman laughed.

"Well, I don't know, Huck, my boy. I don't know about that. Ain't you
and the widow good friends?"

"Yes. Well, she's ben good friends to me, anyway."

"All right, then. What do you want to be afraid for?"

This question was not entirely answered in Huck's slow mind before he
found himself pushed, along with Tom, into Mrs. Douglas' drawing-room.
Mr. Jones left the wagon near the door and followed.

The place was grandly lighted, and everybody that was of any
consequence in the village was there. The Thatchers were there, the
Harpers, the Rogerses, Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, the minister, the editor,
and a great many more, and all dressed in their best. The widow
received the boys as heartily as any one could well receive two such
looking beings. They were covered with clay and candle-grease. Aunt
Polly blushed crimson with humiliation, and frowned and shook her head
at Tom. Nobody suffered half as much as the two boys did, however. Mr.
Jones said:

"Tom wasn't at home, yet, so I gave him up; but I stumbled on him and
Huck right at my door, and so I just brought them along in a hurry."

"And you did just right," said the widow. "Come with me, boys."

She took them to a bedchamber and said:

"Now wash and dress yourselves. Here are two new suits of clothes
--shirts, socks, everything complete. They're Huck's--no, no thanks,
Huck--Mr. Jones bought one and I the other. But they'll fit both of you.
Get into them. We'll wait--come down when you are slicked up enough."

Then she left.

CHAPTER XXXIV

HUCK said: "Tom, we can slope, if we can find a rope. The window ain't
high from the ground."

"Shucks! what do you want to slope for?"

"Well, I ain't used to that kind of a crowd. I can't stand it. I ain't
going down there, Tom."

"Oh, bother! It ain't anything. I don't mind it a bit. I'll take care
of you."

Sid appeared.

"Tom," said he, "auntie has been waiting for you all the afternoon.
Mary got your Sunday clothes ready, and everybody's been fretting about
you. Say--ain't this grease and clay, on your clothes?"

"Now, Mr. Siddy, you jist 'tend to your own business. What's all this
blow-out about, anyway?"

"It's one of the widow's parties that she's always having. This time
it's for the Welshman and his sons, on account of that scrape they
helped her out of the other night. And say--I can tell you something,
if you want to know."

"Well, what?"

"Why, old Mr. Jones is going to try to spring something on the people
here to-night, but I overheard him tell auntie to-day about it, as a
secret, but I reckon it's not much of a secret now. Everybody knows
--the widow, too, for all she tries to let on she don't. Mr. Jones was
bound Huck should be here--couldn't get along with his grand secret
without Huck, you know!"

"Secret about what, Sid?"

"About Huck tracking the robbers to the widow's. I reckon Mr. Jones
was going to make a grand time over his surprise, but I bet you it will
drop pretty flat."

Sid chuckled in a very contented and satisfied way.

"Sid, was it you that told?"

"Oh, never mind who it was. SOMEBODY told--that's enough."

"Sid, there's only one person in this town mean enough to do that, and
that's you. If you had been in Huck's place you'd 'a' sneaked down the
hill and never told anybody on the robbers. You can't do any but mean
things, and you can't bear to see anybody praised for doing good ones.
There--no thanks, as the widow says"--and Tom cuffed Sid's ears and
helped him to the door with several kicks. "Now go and tell auntie if
you dare--and to-morrow you'll catch it!"

Some minutes later the widow's guests were at the supper-table, and a
dozen children were propped up at little side-tables in the same room,
after the fashion of that country and that day. At the proper time Mr.
Jones made his little speech, in which he thanked the widow for the
honor she was doing himself and his sons, but said that there was
another person whose modesty--

And so forth and so on. He sprung his secret about Huck's share in the
adventure in the finest dramatic manner he was master of, but the
surprise it occasioned was largely counterfeit and not as clamorous and
effusive as it might have been under happier circumstances. However,
the widow made a pretty fair show of astonishment, and heaped so many
compliments and so much gratitude upon Huck that he almost forgot the
nearly intolerable discomfort of his new clothes in the entirely
intolerable discomfort of being set up as a target for everybody's gaze
and everybody's laudations.

The widow said she meant to give Huck a home under her roof and have
him educated; and that when she could spare the money she would start
him in business in a modest way. Tom's chance was come. He said:

"Huck don't need it. Huck's rich."

Nothing but a heavy strain upon the good manners of the company kept
back the due and proper complimentary laugh at this pleasant joke. But
the silence was a little awkward. Tom broke it:

"Huck's got money. Maybe you don't believe it, but he's got lots of
it. Oh, you needn't smile--I reckon I can show you. You just wait a
minute."

Tom ran out of doors. The company looked at each other with a
perplexed interest--and inquiringly at Huck, who was tongue-tied.

"Sid, what ails Tom?" said Aunt Polly. "He--well, there ain't ever any
making of that boy out. I never--"

Tom entered, struggling with the weight of his sacks, and Aunt Polly
did not finish her sentence. Tom poured the mass of yellow coin upon
the table and said:

"There--what did I tell you? Half of it's Huck's and half of it's mine!"

The spectacle took the general breath away. All gazed, nobody spoke
for a moment. Then there was a unanimous call for an explanation. Tom
said he could furnish it, and he did. The tale was long, but brimful of
interest. There was scarcely an interruption from any one to break the
charm of its flow. When he had finished, Mr. Jones said:

"I thought I had fixed up a little surprise for this occasion, but it
don't amount to anything now. This one makes it sing mighty small, I'm
willing to allow."

The money was counted. The sum amounted to a little over twelve
thousand dollars. It was more than any one present had ever seen at one
time before, though several persons were there who were worth
considerably more than that in property.

CHAPTER XXXV

THE reader may rest satisfied that Tom's and Huck's windfall made a
mighty stir in the poor little village of St. Petersburg. So vast a
sum, all in actual cash, seemed next to incredible. It was talked
about, gloated over, glorified, until the reason of many of the
citizens tottered under the strain of the unhealthy excitement. Every
"haunted" house in St. Petersburg and the neighboring villages was
dissected, plank by plank, and its foundations dug up and ransacked for
hidden treasure--and not by boys, but men--pretty grave, unromantic
men, too, some of them. Wherever Tom and Huck appeared they were
courted, admired, stared at. The boys were not able to remember that
their remarks had possessed weight before; but now their sayings were
treasured and repeated; everything they did seemed somehow to be
regarded as remarkable; they had evidently lost the power of doing and
saying commonplace things; moreover, their past history was raked up
and discovered to bear marks of conspicuous originality. The village
paper published biographical sketches of the boys.

The Widow Douglas put Huck's money out at six per cent., and Judge
Thatcher did the same with Tom's at Aunt Polly's request. Each lad had
an income, now, that was simply prodigious--a dollar for every week-day
in the year and half of the Sundays. It was just what the minister got
--no, it was what he was promised--he generally couldn't collect it. A
dollar and a quarter a week would board, lodge, and school a boy in
those old simple days--and clothe him and wash him, too, for that
matter.

Judge Thatcher had conceived a great opinion of Tom. He said that no
commonplace boy would ever have got his daughter out of the cave. When
Becky told her father, in strict confidence, how Tom had taken her
whipping at school, the Judge was visibly moved; and when she pleaded
grace for the mighty lie which Tom had told in order to shift that
whipping from her shoulders to his own, the Judge said with a fine
outburst that it was a noble, a generous, a magnanimous lie--a lie that
was worthy to hold up its head and march down through history breast to
breast with George Washington's lauded Truth about the hatchet! Becky
thought her father had never looked so tall and so superb as when he
walked the floor and stamped his foot and said that. She went straight
off and told Tom about it.

Judge Thatcher hoped to see Tom a great lawyer or a great soldier some
day. He said he meant to look to it that Tom should be admitted to the
National Military Academy and afterward trained in the best law school
in the country, in order that he might be ready for either career or
both.

Huck Finn's wealth and the fact that he was now under the Widow
Douglas' protection introduced him into society--no, dragged him into
it, hurled him into it--and his sufferings were almost more than he
could bear. The widow's servants kept him clean and neat, combed and
brushed, and they bedded him nightly in unsympathetic sheets that had
not one little spot or stain which he could press to his heart and know
for a friend. He had to eat with a knife and fork; he had to use
napkin, cup, and plate; he had to learn his book, he had to go to
church; he had to talk so properly that speech was become insipid in
his mouth; whithersoever he turned, the bars and shackles of
civilization shut him in and bound him hand and foot.

He bravely bore his miseries three weeks, and then one day turned up
missing. For forty-eight hours the widow hunted for him everywhere in
great distress. The public were profoundly concerned; they searched
high and low, they dragged the river for his body. Early the third
morning Tom Sawyer wisely went poking among some old empty hogsheads
down behind the abandoned slaughter-house, and in one of them he found
the refugee. Huck had slept there; he had just breakfasted upon some
stolen odds and ends of food, and was lying off, now, in comfort, with
his pipe. He was unkempt, uncombed, and clad in the same old ruin of
rags that had made him picturesque in the days when he was free and
happy. Tom routed him out, told him the trouble he had been causing,
and urged him to go home. Huck's face lost its tranquil content, and
took a melancholy cast. He said:

"Don't talk about it, Tom. I've tried it, and it don't work; it don't
work, Tom. It ain't for me; I ain't used to it. The widder's good to
me, and friendly; but I can't stand them ways. She makes me get up just
at the same time every morning; she makes me wash, they comb me all to
thunder; she won't let me sleep in the woodshed; I got to wear them
blamed clothes that just smothers me, Tom; they don't seem to any air
git through 'em, somehow; and they're so rotten nice that I can't set
down, nor lay down, nor roll around anywher's; I hain't slid on a
cellar-door for--well, it 'pears to be years; I got to go to church and
sweat and sweat--I hate them ornery sermons! I can't ketch a fly in
there, I can't chaw. I got to wear shoes all Sunday. The widder eats by
a bell; she goes to bed by a bell; she gits up by a bell--everything's
so awful reg'lar a body can't stand it."

"Well, everybody does that way, Huck."

"Tom, it don't make no difference. I ain't everybody, and I can't
STAND it. It's awful to be tied up so. And grub comes too easy--I don't
take no interest in vittles, that way. I got to ask to go a-fishing; I
got to ask to go in a-swimming--dern'd if I hain't got to ask to do
everything. Well, I'd got to talk so nice it wasn't no comfort--I'd got
to go up in the attic and rip out awhile, every day, to git a taste in
my mouth, or I'd a died, Tom. The widder wouldn't let me smoke; she
wouldn't let me yell, she wouldn't let me gape, nor stretch, nor
scratch, before folks--" [Then with a spasm of special irritation and
injury]--"And dad fetch it, she prayed all the time! I never see such a
woman! I HAD to shove, Tom--I just had to. And besides, that school's
going to open, and I'd a had to go to it--well, I wouldn't stand THAT,
Tom. Looky here, Tom, being rich ain't what it's cracked up to be. It's
just worry and worry, and sweat and sweat, and a-wishing you was dead
all the time. Now these clothes suits me, and this bar'l suits me, and
I ain't ever going to shake 'em any more. Tom, I wouldn't ever got into
all this trouble if it hadn't 'a' ben for that money; now you just take
my sheer of it along with your'n, and gimme a ten-center sometimes--not
many times, becuz I don't give a dern for a thing 'thout it's tollable
hard to git--and you go and beg off for me with the widder."

"Oh, Huck, you know I can't do that. 'Tain't fair; and besides if
you'll try this thing just a while longer you'll come to like it."

"Like it! Yes--the way I'd like a hot stove if I was to set on it long
enough. No, Tom, I won't be rich, and I won't live in them cussed
smothery houses. I like the woods, and the river, and hogsheads, and
I'll stick to 'em, too. Blame it all! just as we'd got guns, and a
cave, and all just fixed to rob, here this dern foolishness has got to
come up and spile it all!"

Tom saw his opportunity--

"Lookyhere, Huck, being rich ain't going to keep me back from turning
robber."

"No! Oh, good-licks; are you in real dead-wood earnest, Tom?"

"Just as dead earnest as I'm sitting here. But Huck, we can't let you
into the gang if you ain't respectable, you know."

Huck's joy was quenched.

"Can't let me in, Tom? Didn't you let me go for a pirate?"

"Yes, but that's different. A robber is more high-toned than what a
pirate is--as a general thing. In most countries they're awful high up
in the nobility--dukes and such."

"Now, Tom, hain't you always ben friendly to me? You wouldn't shet me
out, would you, Tom? You wouldn't do that, now, WOULD you, Tom?"

"Huck, I wouldn't want to, and I DON'T want to--but what would people
say? Why, they'd say, 'Mph! Tom Sawyer's Gang! pretty low characters in
it!' They'd mean you, Huck. You wouldn't like that, and I wouldn't."

Huck was silent for some time, engaged in a mental struggle. Finally
he said:

"Well, I'll go back to the widder for a month and tackle it and see if
I can come to stand it, if you'll let me b'long to the gang, Tom."

"All right, Huck, it's a whiz! Come along, old chap, and I'll ask the
widow to let up on you a little, Huck."

"Will you, Tom--now will you? That's good. If she'll let up on some of
the roughest things, I'll smoke private and cuss private, and crowd
through or bust. When you going to start the gang and turn robbers?"

"Oh, right off. We'll get the boys together and have the initiation
to-night, maybe."

"Have the which?"

"Have the initiation."

"What's that?"

"It's to swear to stand by one another, and never tell the gang's
secrets, even if you're chopped all to flinders, and kill anybody and
all his family that hurts one of the gang."

"That's gay--that's mighty gay, Tom, I tell you."

"Well, I bet it is. And all that swearing's got to be done at
midnight, in the lonesomest, awfulest place you can find--a ha'nted
house is the best, but they're all ripped up now."

"Well, midnight's good, anyway, Tom."

"Yes, so it is. And you've got to swear on a coffin, and sign it with
blood."

"Now, that's something LIKE! Why, it's a million times bullier than
pirating. I'll stick to the widder till I rot, Tom; and if I git to be
a reg'lar ripper of a robber, and everybody talking 'bout it, I reckon
she'll be proud she snaked me in out of the wet."

CONCLUSION

SO endeth this chronicle. It being strictly a history of a BOY, it
must stop here; the story could not go much further without becoming
the history of a MAN. When one writes a novel about grown people, he
knows exactly where to stop--that is, with a marriage; but when he
writes of juveniles, he must stop where he best can.

Most of the characters that perform in this book still live, and are
prosperous and happy. Some day it may seem worth while to take up the
story of the younger ones again and see what sort of men and women they
turned out to be; therefore it will be wisest not to reveal any of that
part of their lives at present.
1918 New Year Honours
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
The 1918 New Year Honours were appointments by King George V to various orders and honours to reward and highlight good works by citizens of the British Empire. The appointments were published in The London Gazette and The Times in January, February and March 1918.[1][2][3][4][5][6]
Unlike the 1917 New Year Honours, the 1918 honours included a long list of new knights bachelor and baronets, but again the list was dominated by rewards for war efforts. As The Times reported: "The New Year Honours represent largely the circumstances of war, and, perhaps, as usual, they also reflect human nature in an obvious form. The list is one of the rare opportunities for the public to scan the names of soldiers who have distinguished themselves in service."[7]
The recipients of the Order of the British Empire were not classified as being within Military or Civilian divisions until following the war.[3][8]
The recipients of honours are displayed here as they were styled before their new honour, and arranged by honour, with classes (Knight, Knight Grand Cross, etc.) and then divisions (Military, Civil, etc.) as appropriate.
Contents  [hide] 
1	United Kingdom and British Empire
1.1	Viscount
1.2	Baron
1.3	Privy Councillor
1.4	Baronetcies
1.5	Knight Bachelor
1.6	Victoria Cross (VC)
1.7	The Most Honourable Order of the Bath
1.7.1	Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath (GCB)
1.7.1.1	Military Division
1.7.2	Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath (KCB)
1.7.2.1	Military Division
1.7.2.2	Civil Division
1.7.3	Companion of the Order of the Bath (CB)
1.7.3.1	Military Division
1.7.3.2	Civil Division
1.8	The Most Exalted Order of the Star of India
1.8.1	Knight Commander (KCSI)
1.8.2	Companion (CSI)
1.9	The Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George
1.9.1	Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George (GCMG)
1.9.2	Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George (KCMG)
1.9.3	Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George (CMG)
1.10	The Most Eminent Order of the Indian Empire
1.10.1	Knight Grand Commander (GCIE)
1.10.2	Knight Commander (KCIE)
1.10.3	Companion (CIE)
1.11	Imperial Order of the Crown of India
1.12	The Royal Victorian Order
1.12.1	Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order (GCVO)
1.12.2	Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order (KCVO)
1.12.3	Commander of the Royal Victorian Order (CVO)
1.12.4	Member of the Royal Victorian Order, 4th class (MVO)
1.13	The Most Excellent Order of the British Empire
1.13.1	Dame Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire (GBE)
1.13.1.1	Civil Division
1.13.2	Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire (GBE)
1.13.2.1	Civil Division
1.13.3	Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE)
1.13.3.1	Civil Division
1.13.4	Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire (KBE)
1.13.4.1	Military Division
1.13.4.2	Civil Division
1.13.5	Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE)
1.13.5.1	Military Division
1.13.5.2	Civil Division
1.13.6	Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE)
1.13.6.1	Military Division
1.13.6.2	Civil Division
1.13.7	Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE)
1.13.7.1	Military Division
1.13.7.2	Civil Division
1.14	Royal Red Cross
1.14.1	First Class (RRC)
1.14.2	Second Class (ARRC)
1.14.3	Awarded a Bar to the Royal Red Cross (RRC*)
1.15	British Empire Medal (BEM)
1.15.1	Civil Division
1.16	Distinguished Service Order (DSO)
1.16.1	Awarded a Bar to the Distinguished Service Order (DSO*)
1.16.2	Awarded a Second Bar to the Distinguished Service Order (DSO**)
1.17	Military Cross (MC)
1.17.1	Awarded a Bar to the Military Cross (MC*)
1.17.2	Awarded a Second Bar to the Military Cross (MC**)
1.18	Distinguished Conduct Medal (DCM)
1.19	Conspicuous Gallantry Medal (CGM)
1.20	Meritorious Service Medal (MSM)
1.21	Military Medal (MM)
1.22	Awarded a Bar to the Military Medal (MM*)
1.23	Awarded a Second Bar to the Military Medal (MM**)
1.24	Indian Order of Merit (IOM)
1.25	Indian Distinguished Service Medal (IDSM)
1.26	King's Police Medal (KPM)
1.27	Imperial Service Medal (ISM)
2	References
United Kingdom and British Empire[edit]
Viscount[edit]
Lord Marmaduke Furness, by the name, style, and title of Viscount Furness, of Grantley, in the West Riding of the county of York.[9] Chairman of Messrs. Furness, Withy, and Co., who have rendered valuable services to the State with reference to shipping and have rendered possible immense economies. Interested in other shipping, shipbuilding, steel and iron, and colliery undertakings, and director of several important industrial concerns. Obtained an appointment in the Remount Department with the rank of Capt. in 1915. Maintains a hospital of 250 beds for officers.
Baron[edit]
The Rt. Hon. Sir Frederick Cawley Bt MP by the name, style and title of Baron Cawley, of Prestwich, in the county Palatine of Lancaster.[9] Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, and MP for Prestwich Division of Lancashire since 1895, Chairman of the Liberal War Committee and a member of the Dardanelles Commission.
Sir John Brownlee Lonsdale Bt MP by the name, style and title of Baron Armaghdale, of Armagh, in the County of Armagh.[9] MP for Mid Armagh since 1900. Honorary Secretary to the Irish Unionist Party. Has many business interests in the north, being a director of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Bank and vice-chairman of the Manchester Ship Canal Warehousing Company. High Sheriff of County Armagh in 1895.
Almeric Hugh Paget, by the name, style and title of Baron Queenborough, of Queenborough, in the County of Kent.[9] At the outbreak of war founded the Almeric Paget Military Hospital Massage Corps. Elected MP for Cambridge in January 1910, and retained his seat until a few months ago, when he resigned to create a vacancy for Sir Eric Geddes, on his appointment as First Lord of the Admiralty.
Sir James Woodhouse Kt by the name, style and title of Baron Terrington, of Hudderefield, in the County of York.[9] Has been a Railway Commissioner since 1906, and was previously for 11 years Liberal member for Huddersfield. Was Mayor of Hull in 1891. Knighted in 1895.
Privy Councillor[edit]
The King appointed the following to His Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council:
Lord Hugh Cecil MP
Sir Henry Craik KCB MP
Sir Gordon Hewart KC MP
Maj. Sir Henry Norman Bt MP
Tom Richards MP
Lord Edmund Talbot MVO DSO MP
Baronetcies[edit]
The Hon. Justice Dunbar Plunket Barton QC Retiring Judge, Chancery Division, Ireland. Sat as MP for Mid Annagh from 1891 to 1900. Solicitor-General for Ireland.
Alec Black. Supported local charities and efforts to encourage food production; has assisted the Government in the promotion of the fishing industry.
Edward Tootal Broadhurst, Chairman of Tootal Bloadhurst, LCC. (Ltd.), cotton spinners, manufacturers, and merchants, Manchester, which firm has allocated large sums for research and education. Leader in all local war movements.
James Craig MP Lt.-Col. Craig represented Last Down as a Unionist since 1906. He served in the South African War and was Q.M. General, 36th Ulster Division, from 1915 to 1916.
Thomas Cope, Chairman of Leicestershire County Council since 1908. An original member of the local Territorial Force Association, and a leading Unionist
The Rt. Hon. Sir Henry Dalziel MP MP for Kirkcaldy Burghs since 1892. Managing director of Reynolds's Newspaper.
Alfred Herbert Dixon, Chairman of the Cotton Control Board. Chairman and managing director of the Fine Cotton Spinners and Doublers' Association (Limited), and a director of other companies. His services have always been freely placed at the disposal of the Board of Trade on matters connected with the cotton industry.
The Rt. Hon. Ellis Jones Ellis-Griffith KC MP MP for Anglesey since 1895. Was Under-Secretary to the Home Office from 1912 to 1915, before which he was chairman of the Welsh Liberal Party in the House of Commons.
Sir Joseph Lawrence. Chairman of Linotype and Machinery (Limited) and of International Linotype (Limited). One of the pioneers of the Manchester Ship Canal; Sheriff of the City of London, 1900-1. Unionist MP for Monmouth Boroughs, 1901-6.
John Leigh. A leading figure in the Lancashire cotton trade. Has been a generous supporter of war efforts and last year gave a memorial hospital at Altrincham to the British Red Cross Society for the use of 100 wounded officers and donated 50,000 to the Minister of Pensions to provide institutional treatment for disabled soldiers.
Frederick William Lewis. Deputy-chairman of Furness, Withy, and Co., Chairman of many other shipping companies, and director of 20 shipping, shipbuilding, and insurance companies.
Sir Francis Lowe Kt MP Unionist member for the Edgbaston Division of Birmingham since 1898.
Sir George Riddell Kt Director of the News of the World, George Newnes, Ltd. and other publishing firms. Knighted in 1909. As vice-chairman of the Newspaper Conference, Newspaper Proprietors' Association and Newspaper Society he has rendered important services in focusing correspondence between the Government and the Press.
Sir James Ritchie, Lord Mayor of London. (His name already appeared in some works of reference as a baronet, and his inclusion in the present honours list is intended to regularize an informality in the previous title.)
The Rt. Hon. Sir Frederick Edwin Smith Kt KC MP Attorney-General since 1915. Elected MP for Walton Division of Liverpool, 1906; took silk and became a bencher of Gray's Inn, 1908.
Col. Alexander Sprot CMG Commanded Carabiniers (6th Dragoon Guards) in the South African War, having previously served in the Afghan War, 1879-80. Also mentioned in dispatches during the present war. Contested East Fife twice in 1910 as a Unionist.
John Stewart-Clark JP DL Director of Clark and Co. (Limited) and of the Scottish Provident Institution. Member of the Royal Company of Archers. Chairman of the local War Pensions Committee and of the local Red Cross Society in Linlithgowshire.
Thomas Edward Watson JP Has been three times President of the Cardiff Chamber of Commerce. President of the South Wales District Committee for home supplies of coal and coke, and of the Committee for war supplies of coal to France.
Herbert James Whiteley MP Unionist member for Mid-Worcestershire since 1916, and for Ashton-under-Lyne 1895-1906. Ex-Mayor of Blackburn and High Sheriff of Worcestershire, 1913-14.
John Wood MP Unionist MP for Stalybridge since 1910. High Sheriff of Herefordshire in 1900. Strong supporter of the Unionist cause in North Derbyshire.
Knight Bachelor[edit]
Robert N. Anderson, Mayor of Derry and a member of the Irish Convention
William Nicholas Atkinson, LLD lately Divisional Inspector of Mines. A leading mining engineer who has contributed largely to a knowledge of the dangers of coal dust in mines. Joint author of a well-known book on explosions in coal mines.
Dr. Barclay Josiah Baron MB CM Twice Lord Mayor of Bristol and an energetic promoter of the War Loan.
James Bird, Clerk of the London County Council
James Boyton MP Unionist MP for East Marylebone since 1910. Member of the London County Council, 1907C10, and a past president of the Auctioneers' and Estate Agents' Institute
Edmond Browne, standing counsel to a number of trade unions who has rendered important services in regard to the Insurance Acts.
Robert Bruce, Editor of The Glasgow Herald, London and Parliamentary correspondent
James Campbell, Chairman of the North of Scotland College of Agriculture and a governor of the Technical College, Aberdeen. Member of the General Committee of the Church of Scotland.
Emsley Carr, Editor and part proprietor of the News of the World and vice-chairman of The Western Mail.
William Henry Clemmey, Mayor of Bootle.
David S. Davies, formerly High Sheriff of Denbighshire; Chairman of the County Appeal Tribunal and Pensions Committee. Treasurer of the King Edward VII Welsh National Memorial Association.
Arthur Fell MP MP for Great Yarmouth. Author of pamphlets on fiscal question. Chairman of House of Commons Channel Tunnel Committee.
John Galsworthy, novelist and playwright of much distinction. Since the war, he has written in the public service on behalf of various patriotic and humanitarian objects. (Declined knighthood.)[10]
S. Archibald Garland, Mayor of Chichester 1912-18.
Charles Henry Gibbs, Mayor of Lambeth in 1907-08 and 1914-16. Leader of the Unionist Party in Lambeth since 1900.
Ernest W. Glover, worked at the Ministry of Shipping since its formation, having previously been a member of the Admiralty Transport Advisory Committee.
William Henry Hadow MA MusDoc Principal of Armstrong College, Newcastle-on-Tyne. Member of the Council of the Royal College of Music. Edited, and wrote one volume of the Oxford History of Music. Member of the Commission on Welsh Education.
Anthony Hope Hawkins, novelist and playwright, known as "Anthony Hope" to his readers
Thomas Jeeves Horder MD Has made valuable contributions to science in bacteriology.
John Morris-Jones MA Professor of Welsh at the University College of North Wales, Bangor. A member of the Carnarvonshire Education Committee and the Anglesey County Council Has written extensively on Welsh language and literature.
William F. Jury, Organized a supply of cinema films of the war on the Western front and did work for the last War Loan and in organizing war charities.
John Scott Keltie FRGS FSS Well-known geographer. President of the Geographical Section of the British Association; awarded the Cullun Gold Medal of the American Geographical Society and the gold medals of the Paris and Royal Scottish Geographical Societies. Received the Victoria Medal of the Royal Geographical Society (1917).
John Lavery ARA Member of the Royal Scottish Academy. the Royal Hibernian Academy, the Socit Nationale des Beaux-Arts, Paris. Chevalier of the Crown of Italy and of Leopold of Belgium. His works appear in the National Galleries of Dublin, Rome, Berlin, and Brussels, and in the Corporation Galleries of Glasgow, Manchester, and Bradford.
John Lithiby CB Legal Adviser to the Local Government Board. A member of the South-Eastern Circuit.
Sidney James Low MA Lecturer on Imperial and Colonial History, University of London. A well-known author and journalist; editor of the St. James's Gazette, 1888-1897, and for some time literary editor of The Standard. Has done much important work as special correspondent at home and abroad.
George Lunn, Lord Mayor of Newcastle-on-Tyne. Has given valuable help in the organization of labour for the manufacture of munitions and the promotion of the War Loan at Newcastle.
Edwin Landseer Lutyens ARA Architect and artist. Member of committee appointed to advise the Government of India on the site of Delhi in 1912.
James William McCraith, Manager for 40 years of the Nottingham Savings Bank and since 1904 leader of the Unionist Party in Nottingham.
G. Charles Mandleberg, Chairman and managing director of J. Mandleberg and Co. Ltd., Manchester, and chairman of the Salford War Savings Committee and Food Economy Committee.
Thomas Rogerson Marsden, Managing director of Platt Brothers, Oldham, a firm which has had many war contracts.
Henry Milner-White LLD A prominent citizen of Southampton and Treasurer of University College there.
Alpheus Cleophas Morton MP Architect and surveyor educated in Canada. MP for Sutherlandshire since 1906. Has been a member of the Corporation of the City of London since 1882
Edward M. Mountain, Chairman of the Eagle Star and British Dominion Company. Has been of service to the Government in connection with War Loans and Insurance.
David Murray RA President of the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours.
Herbert Nield KC MP Recorder of York. MP for the Ealing Division, Deputy Chairman of Middlesex magistrates; Chairman of Middlesex Appeal Tribunal
James George Owen, Mayor of Exeter for the fourth successive year. Has taken an active part in local war work, and is chairman of many committees. Has given a fleet of ambulances to Devon battalions in France and Salonika
John Phillips MD FRCP Professor Emeritus of Obstetric Medicine, King's College, London, and Consulting Obstetric Physician, King's College Hospital
Edmund Bampfylde Phipps CB Principal Assistant Secretary of the Elementary Education Branch of the Board of Education, and late General Secretary to the Ministry of Munitions
Philip Edward Pilditch, Head of the firm of Pilditch, Chadwick, and Co., architects. Member of the London County Council since 1907, and vice-chairman, 1913-14. Chairman of the Parliamentary and Local Government Committees
Thomas Putnam, Managing director of the Darlington Forge Company. Founder and chairman of Darlington Sailors and Soldiers' Welfare Bureau. A leader of the local Unionist Party
Stephen B. Quinn JP Mayor of Limerick
Patrick Rose-Innes KC Recorder of Sandwich and Rampate since 1905. Commissioner of Assize, S.E. Circuit, 1914C15
William Watson Rutherford MP Unionist MP for West Derby Division of Liverpool since 1903. Head of the firm of Rutherfords of Liverpool and London. Elected to the Liverpool City Council in 1895. Lord Mayor of Liverpool, 1902-3
William Henry Seager, Vice-Chairman of the Cardiff and Bristol Channel Shipowners' Association. Governor of King Edward VII and other hospitals, and chairman of the Cardiff Association for the Blind
Robert Russell Simpson, of Edinburgh, for over 40 years deputy-clerk of the Free and United Free Church, Scotland. One of the founders of tho Edinburgh Industrial Brigade for working lads. Writer to the Signet.
George Frederick Sleight, of Grimsby. One of tho largest trawler owners in the world; he has rendered valuable national services in the promotion of the fish supply.
Arthur Spurgeon JP Managing director of Messrs. Cassoll and Co., publishers, and chairman of the Croydon magistrates; special Parliamentary representative of the National Press Agency in London
Lt.-Col. Harold Jalland Stiles, RAMC. Surgeon to the Royal Edinburgh Hospital for Sick Children and to the Chalners Hospital, Edinburgh
Edmund Stonehouse, three-time Mayor of Wakefield. Has done much valuable work locally on various committees
Henry Tozer, Alderman of the City of Westminster. One of the leaders of the variety theatre industry. Chairman of the Unionist Party in the Strand Division.
Leslie Ward, "Spy" of Vanity Fair from 1873-1909. A member of the Royal Society of Portrait Painters
Howard Kingsley Wood, Member for Woolwich of the London County Council; a prominent Wesleyan; Deputy-Chairman of the London Pension Authority, and chairman of the London Insurance Committee
Alfred William Yeo MP MP for Poplar since 1914. Has represented Limehouse on the L.C.C. for seven years.
British India
Arthur Robert Anderson CIE CBE
Edward Fairless Barber, Additional Member of the Council of the Governor of Madras for making Laws and Regulations
Thomas William Birkett, of Bombay
Col. Harry Albert Lawless Hepper, Major, Royal Engineers, retired.
Thomas Frederick Dawson-Miller KC Chief Justice of the High Court of Judicature at Patna
Binod Chunder Mitter, Barrister-at-Law, lately Officiating Advocate General, Bengal, and a Member of the Council of the Governor for making Laws and Regulations
Henry Adolphus Byden Rattigan, Chief Judge of Chief Court, Punjab
Colonies, Protectorates, etc.
Maj. Andrew Macphail, Canadian Army Medical Corps (Overseas Forces), Professor of the History of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal
Maj.-Gen. Donald Alexander Macdonald CMG ISO Q.M.-General, Canadian Militia
Admiral Charles Edmund Kingsmill RN (Retired), Director of Naval Service in the Dominion of Canada
William James Gage, of Toronto
The Hon. Charles Gregory Wade KC Agent-General in London for the State of New South Wales
Frederick William Young LLB Agent General in London for the State of South Australia
The Hon. Simon Fraser, formerly a Member of the Senate of the Commonwealth of Australia
The Hon. William Fraser, Minister of Public Works of the Dominion of New Zealand
John Robert Sinclair, representative of New Zealand on the Royal Commission on the Natural Resources, Trade and Legislation of certain portions of His Majesty's Dominions
The Hon. John Carnegie Dove-Wilson LLB Judge President, Natal Provincial Division, Supreme Court of South Africa
Maj. William Northrup McMillan, 25th (Service) Battalion, The Royal Fusiliers
Bartle Henry Temple Frere, the Chief Justice of Gibraltar
Victoria Cross (VC)[edit]
Riband and medal of the Victoria Cross
Maj. John Sherwood-Kelly CMG DSO Norfolk Regiment, comd. A Battalion, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers.
Capt. George Randolph Pearkes MC Canadian Mounted Rifles.
Capt. John Fox Russell MC late RAMC, attd. Royal Welsh Fusiliers.
Lt. Robert Gee MC Royal Fusiliers.
Lt. Christopher Patrick John O'Kelly MC Canadian Infantry.
2nd Lt. (acting Lt.-Col.) Philip Eric Bent DSO late Leicestershire Regiment.
2nd Lt. (acting Capt.) Arthur Moore Lascelles, Durham Light Infantry.
Sgt. John MacAulay DCM Scots Guards (Stirling).
Sgt. George Harry Mullin MM Infantry.*Sgt. Charles Edward Spackman, Border Regiment (Fulham).
Cpl. Colin Barron, Canadian Infantry.
L. Cpl. Robert McBeath, Seaforth Highlanders (Kinlochbervie, Lairg, Sutherland).
Pte. George William Clare, late Lancers (Plumstead).
Pte. Thomas William Holmes, Canadian Mounted Rifles.
Pte. Cecil John Kinross, Canadian Infantry.
Pte. Henry James Nicholas, New Zealand Infantry.
Pte. James Peter Robertson, late Canadian Infantry.
Lance Dafadar Gobind Singh, Indian Cavalry.
The Most Honourable Order of the Bath[edit]
Civilian star of the Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath
Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath (GCB)[edit]
Military Division[edit]
Army
Gen. Sir Herbert Charles Onslow Plumer GCMG GCVO KCB ADC
Indian Army
Gen. Sir Robert Irvin Scallon KCB KCIE DSO
Honorary Knight Grand Cross
Hon. Lt.-Gen. His Highness Maharaja Bahadur, Sir Pertab Singh GCSI GCVO KCB ADC of Jodhpur, in recognition of the services rendered by the native States of India during the War
Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath (KCB)[edit]
Military Division[edit]
Royal Navy
Vice-Admiral Sir Cecil Fiennes Thursby KCMG
Rear-Admiral Alexander Ludovic Duff CB
Col. David Mercer CB Royal Marine Light Infantry
Army
Maj.-Gen. James Aylmer Lowthorpe Haldane CB DSO
Maj.-Gen. Alexander Hamilton Gordon CB
Maj.-Gen. Herbert Edward Watts CB CMG
Lt.-Gen. George Francis Milne CB DSO
Maj.-Gen. Edmund Guy Tulloch Bainbridge CB
Maj.-Gen. Hugh Montague Trenchard CB DSO
Maj.-Gen. William Bernard Hickie CB
Maj.-Gen. Sydney Turing Barlow Lawford CB
Maj.-Gen. The Hon. William Lambton CB CMG CVO DSO
Maj.-Gen. George Montague Harper CB DSO
Lt.-Gen. Frederick Rudolph Lambart, Earl of Cavan KP CB MVO
Maj.-Gen. Arthur Edward Aveling Holland CB MVO DSO
Maj.-Gen. Harold Bridgwood Walker CB DSO
Maj.-Gen. Charles Patrick Amyatt Hull CB
Maj.-Gen. Victor Arthur Couper CB
Lt.-Gen. Henry Merrick Lawson CB
Surg.-Gen. Sir David Bruce CB FRS FRCP MB late Army Medical Service
Maj.-Gen. Edward Stanislaus Bulfin CB CVO Col., Yorkshire Regiment, for valuable services rendered in connection with the Military Operations culminating in the capture of Jerusalem
Maj.-Gen. Sir Philip Walhouse Chetwode Bt KCMG CB DSO for valuable services rendered in connection with the Military Operations culminating in the capture of Jerusalem
Australian Imperial Force
Maj.-Gen. John Monash CB
Col. Joseph John Talbot Hobbs CB
Canadian Force
Col. Sir Arthur William Currie KCMG CB
Col. David Watson CB CMG
Maj.-Gen. Sir Richard Ernest William Turner VC KCMG CB DSO General Officer Commanding Canadian Forces in the United Kingdom
New Zealand Force
Tmp Maj.-Gen. Sir Andrew Hamilton Russell KCMG CB
South African Force
Hon. Col. Henry Timson Lukin CB CMG DSO
Honorary Knight Commander
Hon. Maj.-Gen. His Highness Maharaja Sir Ganga Singh Bahadur GCSI GCIE ADC of Bikaner, in recognition of the services rendered by the native States of India during the War
Civil Division[edit]
Surg-Gen. William Henry Norman CB RN
Eng. Vice-Admiral George Goodwin Goodwin CB
Surg.-Gen. George Lenthal Cheatle CB CVO FRCS RN
Paymaster-in-Chief John Henry George Chapple CB CVO RN
Hon. Col. Thomas Ainslie Lunham CB late Cork Royal Garrison Artillery Militia
Alfred Daniel Hall, Secretary to the Board of Agriculture
Sir George Newman MD Principal Medical Officer to the Board of Education
Companion of the Order of the Bath (CB)[edit]
Military Division[edit]
Royal Navy
Rear-Admiral Thomas Dawson Lees Sheppard MVO
Rear-Admiral James Andrew Fergusson
Rear-Admiral Allen Thomas Hunt CSI
Rear-Admiral Vivian Henry Gerald Bernard
Rear-Admiral Edmund Hyde Parker
Capt. George Holmes Borrett ADC
Capt. George Henry Baird
Capt. Edward Reeves
Capt. Thomas Drummond Pratt
Capt. William Wordsworth Fisher MVO
Capt. Robert Nesham Bax
Capt. William Henry Dudley Boyle
Army
Surg.-Gen. Richard Henry Stewart Sawyer CMG MB late Army Medical Service
Maj.-Gen. Reginald Byng Stephens CMG
Maj.-Gen. Herbert Crofton Campbell Uniacke CMG
Maj.-Gen. Philip Geoffrey Twining CMG MVO
Maj.-Gen. William Charles Giffard Heneker DSO
Maj.-Gen. Thomas Herbert John Chapman Goodwin CMG DSO Director-General, Army Medical Service[11]
Col. and Hon. Brig.-Gen.-General Cecil Vernon Wingfield-Stratford CMG
Col. Robert Hammill Firth FRCS Army Medical Service
Col. Ernest Reuben Charles Butler CMG FRCVS
Col. and Hon. Surg.-Gen. Bruce Morland Skinner CMG MVO Army Medical Service
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Frederick Smith CMG DSO late RAMC
Col. William John Chesshyre Butler
Col. Richard Orlando Kellett CMG
Col. Thomas Wyatt Hale CMG Army Ordnance Depot
Col. Herbert de Touffreville Phillips CMG
Surg.-Gen. Henry Neville Thompson CMG DSO MB Army Medical Service
Col. Colquhoun Scott Dodgson CMG
Col. Edwin Henry de Vere Atkinson CMG CIE
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. James Wilfred Stirling CMG Royal Artillery
Col. Percy Agnew Bainbridge CMG Army Ordnance Depot
Col. Anthony John Luther, Army Medical Service
Col. James Matthew Forrest Shine, Army Medical Service
Col. James Barnett Wilson CMG MD Army Medical Service
Col. Foster Reuss Newland CMG MB Army Medical Service
Col. Hugh Champneys Thurston CMG Army Medical Service
Col. Hugh Gilbert Casson CMG
Col. Cecil Lothian Nicholson CMG
Col. The Hon. Charles Strathavon Heathcote-Drummond-Willoughby CMG Reserve of Officers
Hon. Col. Charles Loftus Bates CMG DSO Yeomanry
Tmp Col. Alfred Herbert Tubby CMG MB FRCS Army Medical Service
Tmp Col. Sidney Maynard Smith MB FRCS Army Medical Service
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Cecil Edward Pereira CMG Coldstream Guards
Maj. and Bt. Col. Seymour Hulbert Sheppard CMG DSO Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. John Ponsonby CMG DSO Coldstream Guards
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Edward Douglas, Lord Loch CMG MVO DSO Grenadier Guards
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Hamilton Lyster Reed VC CMG Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Edward Henry Willis CMG Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Robert James Bridgford CMG DSO Shropshire Light Infantry
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. The Hon. John Francis Gathorne-Hardy DSO Grenadier Guards
Maj. and Bt. Col. Arthur Crawford Daly, West Yorkshire Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Col. James Ronald Edmondstone Charles DSO Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Alexander Ernest Wardrop CMG Royal Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Col. Warren Hastings Anderson, Cheshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Arthur Ernest John Perkins, Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Frederick Cuthbert Poole CMG DSO Royal Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Col. Thomas Herbert Shoubridge CMG DSO Northumberland Fusiliers
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. John Campbell CMG DSO Cameron Highlanders
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Cyril Maxwell Ross-Johnson CMG DSO Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. John Guy Rotton CMG Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Edward Spencer Hoare Nairne CMG Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. and Bt.-Col. Percy Orr Hazelton CMG Army Service Corps
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Hugo Douglas de Pree CMG Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Henry Hugh Tudor CMG Royal Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Col. Torquhil George Matheson, Coldstream Guards
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Hugh Maude de Fellenberg Montgomery, Royal Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Col. Nelson Graham Anderson CMG DSO Army Service Corps
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. George Jasper Farmar CMG Worcestershire Regiment
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Harry Dudley Ossulston Ward CMG Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. George Sidney Clive DSO Grenadier Guards
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Ben Atkinson CMG Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Percy Pollexfen de Blaquiere Radcliffe DSO Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Alexander Anderson McHardy CMG DSO Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Julian McCarty Steele CMG Coldstream Guards
Maj. and Bt. Col. Samuel Herbert Wilson CMG Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Charles William Gwynn CMG DSO Royal Engineers
Maj. and Bt. Col. Cyril John Deverell, West Yorkshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Louis James Lipsett CMG Royal Irish Regiment
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Neville John Gordon Cameron CMG Cameron Highlanders
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Robert Clement Gore CMG Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Maj. and Bt. Col. Bartholomew George Price CMG DSO Royal Fusiliers
Lt.-Col. and Hon. Col. Charles Joseph Trimble CMG Reserve
Lt.-Col. Arthur Russell Aldridge CSI CMG MB RAMC
Lt.-Col. Wilfred Spedding Swabey CMG Army Service Corps
Lt.-Col. Edward Charles Massy DSO Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. Percy Douglas Hamilton CMG Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. Charles William Compton CMG Somerset Light Infantry
Tmp Lt.-Col. Alexander Gibb, Royal Engineers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Hugh Jamieson Elles DSO Royal Engineers, and Tank Corps
Maj. Stanley Fielder Mott, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Maj. James Gilbert Shaw Mellor CMG
Tmp Brig.-Gen.-General Raymond de Candolle, Special List
Col. Alexander Dunstan Sharp CMG FRCS RAMC
Lt.-Col. Thomas Finlayson Dewar, RAMC
Surg.-Gen. Francis John Jencken MB Army Medical Services
Col. Stewart Dalrymple Cleeve, late Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Arthur James Kelly, late Royal Engineers
Col. Bridges George Lewis DSO
Col. Reynell Hamilton Bayley Taylor, Army Ordnance Depot
Col. Frederick Charles Lloyd
Col. Richard William Breeks
Col. George Francis Henry le Breton-Simmons
Col. Geoffrey Dominic Close, Royal Engineers
Col. Dudley Howard Ridout CMG
Col. William Coates CB RAMC
Col. Arthur Cecil Currie CMG
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Meade James Crosbie-Dennis, Royal Artillery
Col. Claude John Perceval CMG DSO Royal Artillery
Col. George Fraser Phillips CMG
Lt.-Col. and Hon. Col. William Charles Wright (retired), Royal Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Col. Robert Hutchison DSO Dragoon Guards
Tmp Col. Howard Henry Tooth CMG MD Army Medical Service
Maj. and Bt. Col. Basil Ferguson Burnett-Hitchcock DSO Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. William George Sackville Benson, Army Pay Department
Lt.-Col. Achilles Samut CMG Army Ordnance Depot
Lt.-Col. Reginald Seward Ruston, Army Pay Department
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Julian John Leverson CMG late Royal Engineers
Tmp Honorary Lt.-Col. George Seaton Buchanan MD RAMC
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Harry Osborne Mance CMG DSO Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt.-Col. Andrew Balfour CMG MD FRCP RAMC
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Robert Markham Carter, Indian Medical Service
Col. Knightley Stalker Dunsterville, late Indian Ordnance Department
Col. Andrew Laurie Macfie, late Liverpool Regiment
Col. Patrick William Hendry, late Highland Light Infantry and Volunteer Force
Lt.-Col. Ernest William Greg, Cheshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. Walter Robert Ludlow CB late Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Col. William Charles Douglas DSO late Royal Highlanders
Lt.-Col. George Llewellen Palmer, late Yeomanry
Australian Imperial Force
Col. Henry Gordon Bennett CMG
Col. Charles Henry Brand CMG DSO
Col. Thomas William Glasgow CMG DSO
Col. James Heane CMG DSO
Col. Granville de Laune Ryrie CMG
Col. Alfred Sutton CMG Australian Army Medical Corps
Canadian Force
Col. Frederick Gault Finley, Canadian Army Medical Service
Col. Alexander McDougall, Canadian Forestry Corps
Lt.-Col. Edward Whipple Bancroft Morrison CMG DSO Canadian Artillery
New Zealand Force
Col. Charles Mackie Begg CMG MD FRCS New Zealand Medical Corps
Indian Army
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Herbert Campbell Holman CMG DSO
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. William Bernard James CIE MVO
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Alfred William Fortescue Knox
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Frederic George Lucas DSO Gurkhas
Maj.-Gen. Henry John Milnes MacAndrew DSO
Col. Francis Clifton Muspratt CMG DSO
Col. Charles Gordon Prendergast
Col. Charles Wyndham Somerset CMG MVO
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Robert Edward Vaughan
Civil Division[edit]
Rear-Admiral The Hon. Edward Stafford Fitzherbert
Surg.-Gen. Arthur Edmunds FRCS RN
Surg.-Gen. William Wenmoth Pryn RN
Surg.-Gen. James Lawrence Smith MVO RN
Eng. Rear-Admiral William Frederick Pamphlett
Eng. Rear-Admiral Edouard Gaudin
Capt. Sir Douglas Egremont Robert Brownrigg Bt RN
Col. Commandant Charles Ernest Curtoys, Royal Marine Light Infantry
Capt. Stanley Talbot Dean-Pitt RN
Capt. Frank Osborne Creagh-Osborne RN
Deputy Surg.-Gen. Daniel Joseph Patrick McNabb RN
Paymaster-in-Chief James Bramble RN
Col. Charles Grisborne Brittan, Royal Marine Light Infantry
Eng. Capt. Robert Bland Dixon RN
Frederick William Kite MICE
Maj. Arthur Handley, retired pay, Reserve of Officers Assistant Director of Artillery, War Office
Charles Henry Wellesley, Baron Nunburnholme DSO HM Lt. for the East Riding of Yorkshire, President, East Riding Territorial Force Association
Charles Mackinnon Douglas DL Chairman, Lanarkshire Territorial Force Association
Col. Henry Whistler Smith-Rewse CVO Retired pay, Secretary, Devonshire Territorial Force Association
Col. Richard Thompson, retired pay, Secretary, Cheshire Territorial Force Association
Maj. Godfrey Richard Conyngham Stuart DL Retired pay, Secretary, Suffolk and Cambridgeshire Territorial Force Associations
Capt. Henry Littleton Wheeler DSO Retired pay, Secretary, Staffordshire Territorial Force Association
John Anderson, Secretary of the National Health Insurance Commission, England, now Secretary to the Ministry of Shipping
Horace Perkins Hamilton, Private Secretary to the Chancellor of the Exchequer
Arthur Henry Payne, Comptroller of Companies Department, Board of Trade
Basil Alfred Kemball-Cook, Admiralty
Francis Lewis Castle Floud, Assistant Secretary to the Board of Agriculture, now acting as Director of Local Organisation Division of Food Production Department
Lt.-Col. Walter Edgeworth-Johnstone, Chief Commissioner, Dublin Metropolitan Police
Ewan Francis Macpherson, Legal Member of the Local Government Board for Scotland
Alfred Hamilton Norway, Assistant Secretary to the General Post Office
William Sanger, Assistant Secretary to The Ministry of Pensions
Maurice Lyndham Waller, Prison Commissioner, Head of Prisoners of War Division
Mark Manley Waller, Director of Stores, Admiralty
The Most Exalted Order of the Star of India[edit]

Star of a Knight Grand Commander of the Most Exalted Order of the Star of India
Knight Commander (KCSI)[edit]
George Rivers Lowndes KC an Ordinary Member of the Council of the Governor-General of India
His Highness Maharajadhiraja Maharawal Jawahir Singh Bahadur of Jaisalmer, Rajputana
Sir Archdale Earle KCIE Indian Civil Service, Chief Commissioner of Assam
Stuart Mitford Fraser CSI CIE Indian Civil Service, Political Department, Resident at Hyderabad
John Stratheden Campbell CSI CIE Indian Civil Service, Junior Member, Board of Revenue, United Provinces of Agra and Oudh, and a Member of the Council of the Lieutenant-Governor for making Laws and Regulations
Frank George Sly CSI Indian Civil Service, Commissioner, Central Provinces
In recognition of the services rendered by the native States of India during the War

His Highness Maharaja Lakendra Govind Singh Bahadur of Datia
His Highness Maharajadhiraja Sri Sawai Maharaj Rana Udai Bhan Singh Lokindar Bahadur of Dholpur
Companion (CSI)[edit]
Henry Cecil Ferard CIE Indian Civil Service, Commissioner of Allahabad, United Provinces, and a Member of the Council of the Lieutenant-Governor for making Laws and Regulations
Charles Evelyn Arbuthnot William Oldham, Indian Civil Service, Commissioner, Patna Division, Bihar and Orissa, and an Additional Member of the Council of the Lieutenant-Governor for making Laws and Regulations
Evan Maconochie, Indian Civil Service, Agent to the Governor, Kathiawar, Bombay Presidency
Francis Coope French, Indian Civil Service, Commissioner, Dacca Division, Bengal
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Charles William Grant Richardson, Indian Army, Deputy Q.M.-General in India, lately Deputy Adjutant-General, Army Headquarters
Maj. Arthur Prescott Trevor CIE Indian Army, Deputy Political Resident, Persian Gulf
Horatio Norman Bolton CIE Indian Civil Service, Political Department, Deputy Commissioner, Peshawar, North-West Frontier Province
Louis James Kershaw CIE Indian Civil Service (retired), Secretary, Revenue and Statistics Department, India Office
The Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George[edit]

Star of the Order of Saint Michael and Saint George
Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George (GCMG)[edit]
Lt.-Gen. Sir Cecil Frederick Nevil Macready KCB KCMG Adjutant-General to the Forces
Lt.-Gen. Sir John Steven Cowans KCB MVO Q.M.-General to the Forces
Tmp Surg.-Gen. Sir George Henry Makins KCMG CB FRCS
The Hon. Sir Francis Hyde Villiers GCVO KCMG CB His Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to His Majesty the King of the Belgians
Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George (KCMG)[edit]
Vice-Admiral Frederick Charles Tudor Tudor CB
Rear-Admiral Edward Francis Benedict Charlton CB
Rear-Admiral Sir Osmond de Beauvoir Brock KCVO CB CMG
Rear-Admiral Richard Fortescue Phillimore CB MVO
Maj.-Gen. Charles Tyrwhitt Dawkins CB CMG
Maj.-Gen. Sir George Frederick Gorringe KCB CMG DSO late Royal Engineers
Col. Robert Whyte Melville Jackson CB CMG Army Ordnance Depot
Col. and Hon. Maj.-Gen. Harold Daniel Edmund Parsons CB CMG Army Ordnance Depot
Surg.-Gen. William Grant Macpherson CB CMG MB Army Medical Service
Maj.-Gen. William Henry Rycroft CB CMG
Col. and Hon. Brig.-Gen.-General Francis Sudlow Garratt CB CMG DSO
Gen. Sir Henry Seymour Rawlinson Bt GCVO KCB
Lt.-Gen. Sir Charles Fergusson Bt KCB MVO DSO
Lt.-Gen. Sir Ronald Charles Maxwell KCB late Royal Engineers
Lt.-Gen. Sir Launcelot Edward Kiggell KCB
Lt.-Gen. Sir Henry Sinclair Horne KCB
Maj.-Gen. Sir Charles St. Leger Barter KCB CVO
Maj.-Gen. John Adye CB
Maj.-Gen. Sir Edward Ritchie Coryton Graham KCB Cheshire Regiment
Maj.-Gen. Sir Henry Fuller Maitland Wilson KCB
Maj.-Gen. Sir Richard Cyril Byrne Haking KCB
Maj.-Gen. Harvey Frederic Mercer CB
Maj.-Gen. Frederic Manley Glubb CB DSO
Maj.-Gen. Charles James Briggs KCB
Maj.-Gen. Sir George Henry Fowke KCB
Maj.-Gen. Sir John Joseph Asser KCVO CB
Maj.-Gen. Richard Harte Keatinge Butler CB
Maj.-Gen. Richard Henry Ewart CB CIE DSO
Maj.-Gen. James Frederick Noel Birch CB
Maj.-Gen. John Sharman Fowler CB DSO
Tmp Maj.-Gen. Philip Arthur Manley Nash CB
Col. and Hon. Surg.-Gen. James Murray Irwin CB MB late Army Medical Service
Col. and Hon. Surg.-Gen. James Maher CB late Army Medical Service
Tmp Col. James Purves Stewart CB MD FRCP Army Medical Service
Tmp Col. Thomas Crisp English CMG MB FRCS Army Medical Service
Col. George James Butcher CB CMG Army Ordnance Depot
Hon. Maj.-Gen. Fred Smith CB CMG FRCVS Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Tmp Col. Archibald Edward Garrod CMG MD FRS Army Medical Service
Lt.-Gen. Sir Herbert Eversley Belfield KCB DSO Col., West Riding Regiment
Maj.-Gen. The Hon. Cecil Edward Bingham CB CVO
Maj.-Gen. Frederick Barton Maurice CB
Maj.-Gen. The Hon. Francis Richard Bingham CB
Col. and Hon. Surg.-Gen. Michael William Russell CB late Army Medical Service
Tmp Col. Charles Alfred Ballance CB MVO MB FRCS Army Medical Service
Maj.-Gen. Louis Jean Bols CB DSO For services rendered in connection with the Military Operations culminating in the capture of Jerusalem.
Australian Imperial Force
Maj.-Gen. The Hon. James Whiteside McCay CB Australian Imperial Force
Colonial List
His Honour Frank Stillman Barnard, Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of British Columbia
Horace Archer Byatt CMG Civil Administrator, German East Africa
Maj.-Gen. Samuel Benfield Steele CB MVO Canadian Militia
Herbert James Read CB CMG Assistant Under-Secretary of State, Colonial Office
The Hon. John Mark Davies, President of the Legislative Council of the State of Victoria
Honorary Knight Commander
Adly Yeghen Pasha, Minister of Education in the Egyptian Government
Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George (CMG)[edit]
Capt. Henry George Glas Sandeman RN
Capt. James William Combe RN
Capt. George Bingham Powell RN
Capt. Frederic Godfrey Bird RN DSO
Capt. David Murray Anderson RN MVO
Capt. Percy Molyneux Rawson Royds RN
Capt. Charles Samuel Wills RN DSO
Capt. Charles Laverock Lambe RN DSO
Eng. Capt. Archie Russell Emdin RN
Commander Harold Escombe RN
Commander Donald John Munro RN
Commander Fitzmaurice Acton RN
Commander Ferdinand Halford Elderton RN DSO
Commander Archibald Cochrane RN
Fleet-Paymaster Charles Edward Allen Woolley RN
Paymaster Tom Seaman RN
Fleet-Paymaster Charles Henry Rowe RN
Fleet-Paymaster Charles Ernest Batt RN
Fleet-Surgeon Edward Henry Meaden RN
Lt.-Col. Francis Doveton Bridges, Royal Marine Light Infantry
Maj. Henry Cleeve Benett, Royal Marine Light Infantry
Lt.-Commander David George Hogarth, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Col. Jonas Hamilton du Boulay Travers CB
Col. William Arthur Murray Thompson CB
Col. Cyril Henry Leigh James CB
Col. St. John William Topp Parker CB
Col. Charles Marling Cartwright CB Indian Army
Col. Arthur Herbert Hussey CB
Col. John Gordon Geddes CB
Lt.-Col. and Bt.-Col. Thomas James Atherton CB
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Alexander Vaughan Payne, late Wiltshire Regiment
Col. Edward Ranulph Kenyon CB
Col. Walter Charteris Ross CB
Col. Acton Lemuel Schreiber CB DSO ADC Royal Engineers
Col. Disney John Menzies Fasson CB Royal Artillery
Col. George Strachan Cartwright CB
Col. Gardiner Humphreys CB DSO
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Godfrey Massy
Col. Charles Cunliffe-Owen CB
Col. Arundel Martyn, General List
Col. Philip Cecil Harcourt Gordon, Army Medical Service
Col. Charles Joseph MacDonald MD Army Medical Service
Col. Edward George Browne CB Army Medical Service
Col. Samuel Guise Moores CB Army Medical Service
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Howard Ensor DSO MB RAMC
Col. Colin Lawrence Macnab
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Charles Stuart Wilson CB Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Herbert Edward John Brake CB DSO Royal Artillery
Col. Martin Newman Turner CB
Maj. and Bt. Col. Clement Yatman DSO Northumberland Fusiliers
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Pomeroy Holland-Pryor MVO DSO Indian Army
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Sydney Fortescue Metcalfe DSO Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Geoffrey Herbert Anthony White DSO Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Arthur Wharton Peck, Indian Cavalry
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Walter Mervyn St. George Kirke DSO Royal Artillery
Tmp Col. William Pasteur MD Army Medical Service
Maj. and Bt. Col. Gerald Farrell Boyd DSO Royal Irish Regiment
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Thomas Stanton Lambert, East Lancashire Regiment
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. John Samuel Jocelyn Percy DSO East Lancashire Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Col. Percival Otway Hambro, Hussars
Lt.-Col. Charles Tilson Hudson, Indian Medical Service
Lt.-Col. William Bromley-Davenport DSO Reserve
Lt.-Col. Philip John Joseph Radcliffe, Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. Maurice Spencer, Army Ordnance Depot
Lt.-Col. George Ambrose Cardew DSO Royal Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Ernest Carden Freeth Gillespie CB Army Service Corps
Lt.-Col. Daniel Davis Shanahan DSO RAMC
Lt.-Col. Walter Ernest Onslow Campbell Blunt, Army Pay Department
Lt.-Col. Henry Jenkins Brock DSO Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. Edward John Russell Peel DSO Royal Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Cecil William Davy, Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. George Augustus Stewart Cape, Royal Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Arthur Cecil Lowe DSO Royal Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Ulric Oliver Thynne DSO Yeomanry
Lt.-Col. and Hon. Col. William Dutton Burrard, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt.-Col. Edward Henry Charles Patrick Bellingham DSO General List
Col. Ernest William Bliss DSO Army Medical Service
Col. Alfred Ernest Conquer Keble DSO Army Medical Service
Tmp Honorary Lt.-Col. Nathan Raw MD RAMC
Tmp Lt.-Col. Cecil Walter Paget DSO Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. Philip Leveson Gower DSO Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. James Anderson DSO Highland Light Infantry
Hon. Lt.-Col. Percy George Davies, Army Ordnance Depot
Lt.-Col. Edward William Saurin Brooke DSO Royal Artillery
Capt. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Ernest Frederick Orby Gascoigne DSO Grenadier Guards
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Thomas Herbert Francis Price DSO Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry
Lt.-Col. George Birnie Mackenzie DSO Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt.-Col. Charles Frederick Moores DSO Army Service Corps
Col. Charles William Profeit DSO MB Army Medical Service
Col. Robert James Blackham CIE DSO Army Medical Service
Lt.-Col. Horace Giesler Lloyd DSO Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. Percy Cyriac Burrell Skinner DSO Northamptonshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. William Charles Eric Rudkin DSO Royal Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Bertram Hewett Hunter Cooke DSO Rifle Brigade
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Edward Nicholson Broadbent DSO King's Own Scottish Borderers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Arthur Richard Careless Sanders DSO Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. Robert Gabbett Parker DSO Royal Lancaster Regiment
Lt.-Col. Arthur Thackeray Beckwith DSO Hampshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. Edward Harding Newman DSO Royal Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Francis Arthur Wynter DSO Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt.-Col. John Francis Innes Hay Doyle DSO Royal Artillery
Tmp Lt.-Col. Cyril Aubrey Blacklock DSO General List
Lt.-Col. Edward Evans DSO Wiltshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. Francis Douglas Logan DSO Royal Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. George Ayscough Armytage DSO King's Royal Rifle Corps
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. John Vaughan Campbell VC DSO Coldstream Guards
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. William Harry Verelst Darell DSO Coldstream Guards
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Stuart William Hughes Rawlins DSO Royal Field Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Charles Michael Browne DSO Royal Engineers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Llewelyn Alberic Emilius Price-Davies VC DSO King's Royal Rifle Corps
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Herbert Cecil Potter DSO Liverpool Regiment
Lt.-Col. Edward Arthur Fagan DSO Indian Army
Tmp Lt. Col. John Anselm Samuel Gray DSO Special List
Lt.-Col. Manners Ralph Wilmott Nightingale DSO Indian Army
Tmp Lt.-Col. Geoffrey Harnett Harrisson DSO Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. Walter Bagot Pearson, Lancashire Fusiliers
Tmp Lt.-Col. Frank Percy Crozier DSO General List
Lt.-Col. Charles William Wilkinson DSO Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. Arthur Ellershaw DSO Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt.-Col. Charles Richard Newman DSO Royal Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Reginald Seaburne May DSO Royal Fusiliers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Guy Hamilton Boileau DSO Royal Engineers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Edmund William Costello DSO Indian Army
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Robert Harvey Kearsley DSO Dragoon Guards
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Edward Lacy Challenor DSO Leicestershire Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Francis James Marshall DSO Seaforth Highlanders
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Frank Graham Marsh, Indian Army
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Sir William Algernon Ireland Kay Bt DSO King's Royal Rifle Corps
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Frederick William Lawrence Sheppard Hart Cavendish DSO Lancers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Thomas Wolryche Stansfield DSO Yorkshire Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. John Edward Spencer Brind DSO Royal Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. George Henry Addison DSO Royal Engineers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. William Edmund Ironside DSO Royal Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Robert Gordon-Finlayson DSO Royal Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Alan Thomas Paley DSO Rifle Brigade
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. James Keith Dick-Cunyngham DSO Gordon Highlanders
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Francis Stewart Montague-Bates DSO East Surrey Regiment
Capt. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Guy Payan Dawnay MVO DSO late Coldstream Guards
Tmp Lt.-Col. Ernest Henry Starling MD FRCP FRS RAMC
Tmp Lt.-Col. Leonard Stanley Dudgeon FRCP RAMC
Lt.-Col. Francis William Gosset DSO Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. John Hamilton Hall DSO Middlesex Regiment
Lt.-Col. Herbert Norwood Blakeney DSO Middlesex Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Arthur Jervois Turner DSO Royal Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Henry Clifford Rodes Green DSO King's Royal Rifle Corps
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. George Dominic Price, West Yorkshire Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Charles George Lewes DSO Essex Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Gerald Edward Bayley DSO York & Lancaster Regiment
Lt.-Col. William Kaye Legge DSO Essex Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Robert Emile Shepherd Prentice DSO Highland Light Infantry
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Sir Hereward Wake Bt DSO King's Royal Rifle Corps
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Rodolph Ladeveze Adlercron DSO Cameron Highlanders
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Charles Howard Foulkes DSO Royal Engineers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Edward Weyland Martin Powell DSO Royal Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Clennell William Collingwood DSO Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Percival Suther DSO Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Harold St. John Loyd Winterbotham DSO Royal Engineers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Arthur Wollaston Bartholomew DSO Royal Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Cecil Percival Heywood DSO Coldstream Guards
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Harry Beauchamp Douglas Baird DSO Indian Army
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Tom Ince Webb-Bowen, Bedfordshire Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Hugh Roger Headlam DSO York & Lancaster Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Norman William Webber DSO Royal Engineers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Walter William Pitt-Taylor DSO Rifle Brigade
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Robert John Collins DSO Royal Berkshire Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Charles Ogston DSO Gordon Highlanders
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Gervase Thorpe DSO Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Winston Joseph Dugan DSO Worcestershire Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Lewis James Comyn DSO Connaught Rangers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Charles Samuel Owen DSO Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Clifton Inglis Stockwell DSO Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Charles Harry Lyon DSO North Staffordshire Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Arthur Hardwicke Spooner DSO Lancashire Fusiliers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Henry Pelham Burn DSO Gordon Highlanders
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. John Greer Dill DSO Leinster Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Henry Courtenay Hawtrey DSO Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt.-Col. Brodie Haldane Henderson, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt.-Col. Edward Hyde Hamilton Gordon DSO General List
Lt.-Col. Arthur Clement Wilkinson DSO Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Herbert Edward Trevor DSO Yorkshire Light Infantry
Maj. Francis Jenkins, Coldstream Guards
Maj. Percy Gerald Parker Lea DSO Army Service Corps
Maj. Henry Warburton Hill DSO Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Roger Gordon Thomson DSO Royal Field Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Gerald Carew Sladen DSO MC Rifle Brigade
Tmp Lt.-Col. Christopher D'Arcy Bloomfield Saltern Baker-Carr DSO Tank Corps
Maj. John Edmund Hugh Balfour DSO late Hussars
Maj. Alexander James King DSO late Royal Lancaster Regiment
Tmp Major George Simpson Pitcairn, Royal Engineers
Maj. Vaughan Randolph Hine-Haycock DSO late Royal Artillery
Capt. and Bt. Major Rudolph Edmund Aloysius, Viscount Feilding DSO Coldstream Guards
Capt. and Bt. Major Cyril Edward Wilson DSO late East Lancashire Regiment
Capt. Bryan Charles Fairfax, New Armies
Col. The Rt. Hon. John Edward Bernard Seely CB DSO Yeomanry
Lt.-Col. Arthur Saxby Barham, London Regiment
Lt.-Col. William Elliott Batt, Royal Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Frederick William Duffield Bendall, Middlesex Regiment
Lt.-Col. Lionel Leonard Bilton, Worcestershire Regiment
Lt.-Col. Hugh Delabere Bousfield DSO West Yorkshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. Robert Chapman DSO Royal Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Robert Joyce Clarke DSO Royal Berkshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. Charles Clifford, Royal Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Hugh Charles Copeman DSO Suffolk Regiment (late Essex Regiment)
Lt.-Col. Clarence Isidore Ellis, RAMC
Lt.-Col. Archibald Stewart Leslie, Yeomanry
Lt.-Col. Frederick William Schofield, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Lt.-Col. John William Slater, Liverpool Regiment
Lt.-Col. Francis Henry Douglas Charlton Whitmore DSO Yeomanry
Maj.-Gen. Raymond Northland Revell Reade CB
Col. William Pitt
Col. Thomas Ryder Main CB
Col. Arthur Henry Bagnold CB
Col. William Hodgson Suart
Col. Henry Richard Beadon Donne CB
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Alfred Keene DSO late Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. William Augustus Edmund St. Clair, late Royal Engineers
Col. Frederick Rainsford-Hannay CB
Col. Charles Henry Darling
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Percy Rice Mockler, late Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Hon. Col. Sir Herbert Merton Jessel Bt London Regiment and Remount Service
Col. and Hon. Brig.-Gen.-General Hugh James Archdale CB
Maj. and Bt. Col. Edward Bell, late Worcestershire Regiment
Lt. Joseph Griffiths MD FRCS RAMC
Col. Charles Edwin Nuthall CB
Col. Guy William Fitton, Army Pay Department
Col. George Francis Milner DSO
Col. Arnaud Clarke Painter
Col. and Hon. Brig.-Gen.-General Frank Grimshaw Lagier Lamotte
Col. Louis Peile Carden
Col. Arthur Ludovic Molesworth
Col. Charles Pye Oliver MD RAMC
Col. and Hon. Brig.-Gen.-General Philip Thomas Buston CB DSO
Col. Edward Bickford
Col. Ernest Augustus Tudor Tudor
Col. Frederick Charlton Meyrick CB Late Major, Hussars
Col. Harold Stephen Langhorne CB Army Ordnance Depot
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Wilkinson Dent Bird CB DSO ADC
Col. Charles Henderson Melville MB Army Medical Service
Col. Malcolm David Graham CB Assistant Military Secretary, War Office
Tmp Honorary Col. Sir John Collie MD Army Medical Service
Lt.-Col. John George Adamson, late King's Own Yorkshire Light Infantry
Lt.-Col. John Arthur Coghill Somerville, late Royal Sussex Regiment
Lt.-Col. Arthur de Courcy Scanlan, RAMC
Lt.-Col. William Denziloe Sanderson DSO North Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Honorary Lt.-Col. Harry Richard Kenwood MB RAMC
Tmp Honorary Lt.-Col. John Robertson MD RAMC
Lt.-Col. John Ward MP Middlesex Regiment
Tmp Lt.-Col. John Charles Grant Ledingham MB RAMC
Lt.-Col. and Hon. Col. Alfred Briffa, King's Own Malta Regiment of Militia
Maj. Frederick Knight Essell, late East Kent Regiment
Maj. Henry Charles Bulkeley DSO
Tmp Lt.-Col. Charles Morley Wenyon MB RAMC
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Henry Andrew Micklem DSO Retired pay
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Charles Monk Gibbon, Royal Irish Fusiliers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Robert May Wetherell, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry
Lt.-Col. Henry Godfrey Howorth, Royal Artillery
Tmp Lt.-Col. Arthur Treharne Andrews, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt.-Col. George Basil Price MD RAMC
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Duncan le Geyt Pitcher, Indian Army
Lt.-Col. Stanley Clarence Halse, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. William Dundas Dooner, Army Ordnance Depot
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Frederick Walter Radcliffe CIE Dorsetshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. Arthur John Bromley Church, Army Pay Department
Lt.-Col. Hamlet Bush Toller, Army Pay Department
Lt.-Col. Cecil de Sausmarez DSO Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt.-Col. Henry Stewart Anderson, RAMC
Lt.-Col. William Parry, Army Pay Department
Tmp Lt.-Col. Sir William Henry Houghton-Gastrell MP Army Service Corps
Lt.-Col. William Egerton Edwards, Royal Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Kenneth Marten Body, Army Ordnance Depot
Lt.-Col. Frederick Lindsay Lloyd
Hon. Lt.-Col. Alfred James Foster, Northumberland Fusiliers, late Royal Garrison Artillery, Militia
Lt.-Col. Charles Richard Blackstone Owen, Royal Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Lewis Frederick Renny DSO Royal Dublin Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Robert Henry More, late Imperial Yeomanry, Assistant Military Secretary, War Office
Maj. Charles Edward Norton, late Royal Engineers
Maj. the Honorauble Alexander Victor Frederick Villiers Russell MVO Grenadier Guards
Maj. Lionel George Tempest Stone, Royal Fusiliers
Maj. John Sedley Newton de Joux, South Staffordshire Regiment
Maj. Francis Vernon Willey, Yeomanry
Maj. James George Weir, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Major Arthur John Allen-Williams MICE Royal Engineers
Capt. Cecil Henry Whittington, Royal Flying Corps
Lt.-Col. and Hon. Col. Hugh Henry John Williams Drummond, late Yeomanry
Lt.-Col. and Hon. Col. Lionel Richard Cavendish Boyle MVO late Honourable Artillery Company
Lt.-Col. Stanley Hatch Page, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Osmond Robert McMullen, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt.-Col. John Fred Keen, Royal Engineers
Maj. Thomas Wardrop Griffith MD RAMC
Lt.-Col. William Mitchell Roocroft, RAMC
Australian Imperial Force
Maj.-Gen. Cyril Brudenell Bingham White CB DSO ADC
Col. George Walter Barber DSO Medical Corps
Col. Thomas Albert Blamey DSO Infantry
Col. Charles Frederick Cox CB Commonwealth Military Forces
Col. Walter Adams Coxen DSO Commonwealth Military Forces
Col. Robert Rupert Major Downes, Medical Corps
Col. Walter Ramsay McNicoll DSO Infantry
Col. Robert Smith DSO Infantry
Lt.-Col. Harold Edward Cohen DSO Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Ernest Arthur Kendall, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Lt.-Col. Raymond Lionel Leane DSO MC Infantry
Lt.-Col. Edward Fowell Martin DSO Infantry
Lt.-Col. Athelstan Markham Martyn DSO Engineers
Lt.-Col. Charles Gordon Norman Miles DSO Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Alexander Windeyer Ralston DSO Infantry
Lt.-Col. William Henry Scott DSO Light Horse Regiment
Lt.-Col. George Cattell Somerville DSO
Lt.-Col. Walter Howard Tunbridge CB Army Service Corps
Lt.-Col. Arthur Thomas White, Army Medical Corps
Lt.-Col. Cyril Tracy Griffiths
Senior Chaplain James Green
Lt.-Col. John Gordon, Army Medical Corps
Tmp Lt.-Col. Lionel James Hurley, attd. Australian Imperial Force
Lt.-Col. George Hodges Knox
Lt.-Col. Douglas Murray McWhae, Army Medical Corps
Hon. Lt.-Col. James Anderson Murdoch, Army Medical Corps
Lt.-Col. Kenneth Smith, Army Medical Corps
Canadian Force
Lt.-Col. Hugh Marshall Dyer DSO Infantry
Lt.-Col. William Antrobus Griesbach DSO Infantry
Lt.-Col. Frederic William Hill DSO Infantry
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. James Howden MacBrien DSO Dragoons
Lt.-Col. Charles Henry MacLaren DSO Artillery
Maj. Howard Lionel Bodwell DSO Pioneers
Maj. douard de Bellefeuille Panet DSO Artillery
Col. John Alexander Armstrong
Col. Ernest Charles Ashton
Col. Kenneth Cameron, Army Medical Corps
Col. George Septimus Rennie, Army Medical Corps
Col. Wallace Arthur Scott, Army Medical Corps
Col. Walter Langmuir Watt, Army Medical Corps
Lt.-Col. James Louis Regan, Royal Army Pay Corps
Maj. John Andrew Amyot, Army Medical Corps
Maj. Bernard Rickert Hepburn, Forestry Corps
Tmp Honorary Major George Anderson Wells, Chaplain Services
New Zealand Force
Lt.-Col. Norris Stephen Falla DSO New Zealand Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. George Thompson Hall, Army Service Corps
Maj. Thomas Henry Dawson, Infantry
Maj. Thomas Mill MB FRCS Medical Corps
Maj. Norton Francis, Motor Service Corps
South African Force
Col. Stanley Archibald Markham Pritchard, Native Labour Corps
Colonial List
Philip Arnold Anthony, General Manager of the Federated Malay States Railways
Algernon Edward Aspinall, Secretary, The West India Committee
Lt.-Col. Louis Edward Barnett, New Zealand Medical Corps
Harry Fagg Batterbee, of the Colonial Office, Private Secretary to the Secretary of State for the Colonies
Rodolphe Boudreau, Clerk of the Privy Council for Canada
Peter Joseph McDermott ISO Under-Secretary, Chief Secretary's Department, State of Queensland
Arthur Mews, Deputy Colonial Secretary, Newfoundland
The Hon. William Bispham Propsting, Attorney-General and Minister for Railways of the State of Tasmania
Theodorus Gustaff Truter, Commissioner of Police, Union of South Africa
Robert Walter, Colonial Secretary of the Colony of British Honduras
Jeremiah Wilson, Postmaster-General, Union of South Africa
Diplomatic and Overseas Residents
John Charles Tudor Vaughan MVO Counsellor at His Majesty's Embassy at Madrid
James William Ronald Macleay, Counsellor of Embassy in His Majesty's Diplomatic Service
Dayrell Eardley Montague Crackanthorpe, Counsellor to His Majesty's Legation at Athens
Edward Henry John Leslie, of the Foreign Office
Hugh Gurney MVO First Secretary to His Majesty's Legation at Copenhagen
Guy Harold Locock, of the Foreign Office, attached to the Department of Commercial Intelligence
Honorary Companions
His Highness Daudi Chwa, Kabaka of Buganda
Louis Antonio Andrade, District Commissioner for the Island of Zanzibar
The Most Eminent Order of the Indian Empire[edit]

Riband, badge and star of the Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire
Knight Grand Commander (GCIE)[edit]
His Highness Maharajadhiraja Sawai Tukoji Rao Holkar Bahadur, of Indore, in recognition of the Services rendered by the Native States of India during the War
Knight Commander (KCIE)[edit]
John Barry Wood CSI CIE Indian Civil Service, Political Secretary to the Government of India in the Foreign and Political Department, and an Additional Membei of the Council of the Governor-General for making Laws and Regulations
Bertram Sausmarez Carey CSI CIE VD Burma Commission, Commissioner, Sagaing, Burma, and a Member of the Council of the Lieutenant-Governor for making Laws and Regulations
Alfred Hamilton Grant CSI CIE Indian Civil Service, Foreign Secretary to the Government of India in the Foreign and Political Department, and an Additional Member of the Council of the Governor-General for making Laws and Regulations
His Highness Raja Bir Indra Singh, of Rajgarh.
His Highness Raja Sir Bhure Singh KCSI CIE of Chamba
His Highness Raja Bhim Sen, of Suket
Capt. His Highness Rana Ranjit Singh, of Barwani Majaraja *Bir Mitradaya Singh Deo, of Sonpur Raja Han Singh, Commander-in-Chief of the Kashmir Army
Honorary Knight Commander
Abdul Karim Fadthli bin Ah, Sultan of Al Hauta (Lahej)
Companion (CIE)[edit]
Arthur Herbert Ley, Indian Civil Service, Officiating Secretary, Commerce and Industry Department, Government of India
Peter Henry Clutterbuck VD Indian Forest Service, Chief Conservator of Forests, United Provinces, and a Member of the Council of the Lieutenant-Governor for making Laws and Regulations
James Donald, Indian Civil Service, Secretary to Government of Bengal, Financial Department, and an Additional Member of the Council of the Governor for making Laws and Regulations
William Woodward Hornell, Indian Educational Service, Director of Public Instruction, Bengal, and an Additional Member of the Council of the Governor for making Laws and Regulations
Harchandrai Vishandas, Pleader, Karachi, President of the Municipal Corporation and an Additional Member of the Council of the Governor of Bombay for making Laws and Regulations
Thomas Ryan, Finance Accounts Department, Secretary to the Indian Munitions Board
Arthur William Botham, Indian Civil Service, Second Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, Assam, and a Member of the Council of the Chief Commissioner for making Laws and Regulations
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Henry Francis Cleveland, Indian Medical Service, Deputy Director-General, Indian Medical Service
Augustus Henry Deane VD His Majesty's Consul for Pondicherry and Karikal
Lt.-Col. Bawa Jiwan Singh, Indian Medical Service, Inspector-General of Prisons, Bihar and Orissa, and an Additional Member of the Councilof the Lieutenant-Governor for making Laws and Regulations
Lt.-Col. William Byan Lane, Indian Medical Service, Inspector-General of Prisons, Central Provinces
Harry Nelson Heseltine, Civil Accounts Department, Accountant-General for Railways, India
Alexander Langley, Indian Civil Service, Deputy Commissioner of Hoshiarpur, Punjab
Lt.-Col. Henry Smith MD Indian Medical Service, Civil Surgeon, Amritsar, Punjab
Lt.-Col. Francis William Hallowes, Supply and Transport Corps, Director of Farms, India
Maj. Henry Coddington Brown, Indian Medical Service, Assistant Director, Central Research Institute, Kasauli
Robert Colquhoun Boyle, Indian Police, Commandant, Frontier Constabulary, North-West Frontier Province
Lewis Wynne Hartley, Income-Tax Commissioner, Bombay
Raja Sayyid Abu Jafar, Taluqdar of Pirpur, in the Fyzabad District of Oudh, United Provinces
Rai Bahadur Pandit Gopinath, Member of Council, Jaipur State, Rajputana
Jhala Sri Mansinghji Suraj Sinhji, Dewan of Dhrangadhra, Kathiawar, Bombay Presidency
Khan Bahadur Khan Ahmad Shah, Honorary Sub-Judge and Hon. Magistrate, Jullundur, Punjab
Assistant Surgeon Kedar Nath Das MD Professor of Midwifery, Campbell Medical School, Calcutta
Brig.-Gen.-General John Latham Rose, Indian Army, Officiating Inspector-General, Imperial Service Troops
Lt.-Col. Roger Lloyd Kennion, Indian Army, Political Department, Consul at Kermanshah
Lt.-Col. Hugh Augustus Keppel Gough, Indian Army, Political Department, Consul at Shiraz, Persian Gulf
Temporary Major John Arnold Wallinger DSO Indian, Police
Capt. Edward William Charles Noel, Indian Army, His Britannic Majesty's Vice-Consul, Ahwaz, and Assistant to Political Resident in Persian Gulf
His Highness Maharaja Tashi Naingyal, of Sikkim Sao Kawn Kiao Intaleng, Sawbwa of Kengtung
Imperial Order of the Crown of India[edit]
Her Highness Maji Sahiba Girraj Kaur, of Bharatpur
The Royal Victorian Order[edit]

Insignia of a Knight / Dames Commander of the Royal Victorian Order
Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order (GCVO)[edit]
His Highness Maharaja Maharana Sir Fateh Singh Bahadur, of Udaipur GCSI GCIE
The Rt. Hon. James, Viscount Bryce OM
Sir Bertrand Edward Dawson KCVO CB MD (dated 22 December 1917)
Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order (KCVO)[edit]
Sir Charles Edward Troup KCB
Lt.-Col. Hugh Mallinson Rigby FRCS RAMC (dated 22 December 1917)
Commander of the Royal Victorian Order (CVO)[edit]
Sidney West Harris CB
Matthew Walter Gibson MVO ISO
John Leonard Bolden
Member of the Royal Victorian Order, 4th class (MVO)[edit]
Lt.-Col. Wyndham Raymond Portal DSO (dated 20 December 1917)
Staff Surgeon Louis Greis, Royal Navy (dated 22 December 1917)
Lt.-Col. John Cyril Giffard Alers Hankey
Capt. Augustus Frederick Liddell, late Royal Artillery
The Most Excellent Order of the British Empire[edit]

Insignia of a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire
Dame Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire (GBE)[edit]
Civil Division[edit]
Her Majesty, Queen Alexandra
Margaret, Baroness Ampthill CI President of the Bedfordshire Branch of the British Red Cross Society; Member of Council, British Red Cross Society; Head of the Voluntary Aid Detachment Department, Devonshire House
Edith Isabel Benyon, President of the Berkshire Branch of the British Red Cross Society; Commandant of Englefield House Hospital, near Reading
Aimee Evelyn, Lady Dawson, Joint Honorary Secretary, Queen Mary's Needlework Guild
Violet Hermione, Duchess of Montrose, President of the Scottish Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Mary Elizabeth, Viscountess Northcliffe, Member of the Joint Committee of the British Red Cross-Society and Order of St. John of Jerusalem; Donor and Administrator of Lady Northcliffe's Hospital for Officers
Dominion of New Zealand
Her Excellency Annette Louise, Countess of Liverpool
British India
Her Highness Nawab Sultan Jahan Begum GCSI GCIE CI of Bhopal, in recognition of Services rendered by the Native States of India during the War.
Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire (GBE)[edit]
Civil Division[edit]
Sir Thomas Dunlop Bt Lord Provost of Glasgow
William Henry Ellis, Master Cutler of Sheffield
Sir Richard Charles Garton, Founder of the Garton Foundation for Promoting the Study of International Policy and Economics; Honorary Treasurer of the Trust Fund Committee of Queen Mary's Hostel
The Rt. Hon. Sir David Harrel KCB KCVO ISO Chairman of the Committee on Production
Sir Robert Arundell Hudson, Treasurer and Financial Director of the Joint Committee of the British Red Cross Society and the Order of St. John of Jerusalem in England
Col. Sir Arthur Hamilton Lee KCB MP Director-General of Food Production
Sir William Plender
Egypt and the Sudan
Gen. Sir Francis Reginald Wingate GCB GCVO KCMG DSO His Majesty's High Commissioner for Egypt
British India
In recognition of Services rendered by the Native States of India during the War 

Lt.-Gen. His Highness Maharajadhiraja Sir Pratap Singh Bahadur GCSI GCIE of Jammu and Kashmir
Maj.-Gen. His Highness Maharajadhiraja Sir Sawai Madho Singh Bahadur GCSI GCIE GCVO of Jaipur
Lt.-Col. His Highness Maharao Sir Umed Singh Bahadur GCSI GCIE of Kotah
Lt.-Col. His Highness Maharahadhiraja Sri Sir Bhupindar Singh Mahindar Bahadur GCIE of Patiala
Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE)[edit]
Civil Division[edit]
The Hon. Eva Isabella Henrietta Anstruther, Organiser of Soldiers Libraries
Caroline, Lady Arnott, Vice-President, Soldiers and Sailors Help Society, Dublin
Maud Burnett, Town Councillor of Tynemouth
Alice Mary Godman[12]
Agnes Lowndes, Lady Jekyll, Head of Stores Department, Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Adelaide Livingstone, Secretary of the Government Committee on the Treatment by the Enemy of British Prisoners of War
Ethel Locke King, Vice-President of North Surrey Division and Assistant County Director, Surrey, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Flora, Lady Lugard, Joint Founder of the War Refugees Committee, and Founder of the Lady Lugard Hospitality Committee
Margaret Ker Pryse-Rice, President, Carmarthenshire Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Rosamond Cornelia Gwladys, Viscountess Ridley, Donor and Administrator, Lady Ridley's Hospital for Officers
Edith Harriet, Lady Sclater, President of Lady Sclater's Work Room and Smokes Fund
Olive Crofton, Lady Smith-Dorrien, President of the Hospital Bag Fund
Janet Stancomb-Wills
May Webster, Chairman of the British Women's Hospitals Committee; Chairman of the Three Arts Women's Employment Fund
Commonwealth of Australia
Madame Melba, for services in organising patriotic work
Newfoundland
Margaret Agnes, Lady Davidson, for services in connection with the Women's Patriotic Association
Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire (KBE)[edit]
Military Division[edit]
Army
Col. James Galloway CB Army Medical Service, Chief Commissioner for Medical Services, Ministry of National Service
Brig.-Gen.-General Louis Charles Jackson CB CMG Late Controller of the Trench Warfare Research Department, Ministry of Munitions
Col. John Seymour Lloyd CMG Director General of Recruiting, Royal Army Service Corps
Civil Division[edit]
Francis Arthur Aglen, Inspector-General of the Chinese Maritime Customs
Frank Baillie, Director of National Aeroplane Factory, Toronto
Clement Anderson Montague-Barlow MP LLD
John Field Beale, Vice-Chairman, Royal Commission on Wheat Supplies; Chairman of Allied Wheat Executive
Col. Sir George Thomas Beatson KCB MD DL VD Chairman, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Walter Becker
Andrew Caird, Administrator, New York Headquarters of the British War Mission to the United States of America
James Cantlie MB FRCS Member of Council and of Executive Committee, British Red Cross Society
Col. Charles Frederick Close CB CMG Director-General of the Ordnance Survey of the United Kingdom
Alfred Thomas Davies CB Founder and Hon. Director of the British Prisoners of War Book Scheme
Joseph Davies, Representative for Wales and Monmouthshire of the Cabinet Committee for Prevention of Unemployment and Distress
William Henry Davison
Alfred Hull Dennis CB Assistant Treasury Solicitor
The Rt. Hon. Willoughby Hyett Dickinson MP Chairman of the Soldiers Dependants' Assessment Appeals Committee
William Don, Lord Provost of Dundee
Arthur John Dorman, Chairman of Messrs. Dorman, Long and Co., of Middlesbrough
Bignell George Elliott
Herbert Trustram Eve, Chairman of the Forage Committee
Walter Morley Fletcher MD DSc FRS Secretary of the Medical Research Committee
Sir William Bower Forwood
Lt.-Col. Henry Fowler CBE Chief Mechanical Engineer to the Midland Railway; Superintendent of the Royal Aircraft Factory, Farnborough
Col. Alexander Gibb, Royal Engineers, of the firm of Messrs. Easton, Gibb and Son
Kenneth Weldon Goadby MRCS LRCP Member of the War Office Committee for the Study of Tetanus
Arthur Home Goldfinch, Director of Raw Materials, Department of the Surveyor-General of Supply, War Office
William Athelstane Meredith Goode, Honorary Secretary of the National Committee for Relief in Belgium
Alexander Gracie MVO Managing Director of the Fairfield Shipbuilding and Engineering Company, Ltd.
Sir William Grey-Wilson KCMG Chairman of the Central Committee for Patriotic Organisations
Connop Guthrie, Representative of the Director of Transports in the United States of America
Lt.-Col. Frederick Hall MP
Arthur Ambrose Hall Harris, Acting Director of Overseas Transport to the Canadian Government; Representative of the Director of Transports in Canada
Frederick Ness Henderson, Member of the Admiralty Shipbuilding Council
Philip Gutterez Henriques, Deputy Controller of Munitions Finance
Ernest Varvill Hiley, Late Deputy Director of the National Service Department
Col. Arthur Richard Holbrook VD DL JP
Lt.-Col. Robert Stevenson Home KC Royal Engineers, Director of Materials and Priority, Controller's Department, Admiralty
George Burton Hunter DSc Chairman of Messrs. Swan, Hunter & Wigham Richardson & Company, Ltd., Newcastle-on-Tyne
Gustave Jarmay, Managing Director of Messrs. Brunner, Mond & Co., Ltd.
Edgar Rees Jones MP Superintendent, Priority Department, Ministry of Munitions
Roderick Jones, Managing Director, Reuter's Telegram Company, Ltd.
Charles Halestaff Kenderdine, Honorary Secretary and Treasurer, Queen Mary's Convalescent Auxiliary Hospitals, Roehampton
Harry Livesey, Director of Navy Contracts, Admiralty; formerly Deputy Director of Inland Water Transport and Docks, War Office
John Mann, Controller of Contracts, Ministry of Munitions
Arthur Harold Marshall MP Chairman of the Central Building Board, of the Parliamentary Munitions Committee, and of the Parliamentary Recruiting Committee
George Ernest May, Secretary to the Prudential Assurance Company; Manager of the American Dollar Securities Committee
Peter Hannay McClelland, Member of Advisory Board, Surveyor General of Supply Department, War Office
James McKechnie, Managing Director of Messrs. Vickers, Ltd., Barrow
Col. Andrew Muter John Ogilvie CB Royal Engineers, Director of Army Signals (Home Defence); Second Secretary to the Post Office
Thomas Henry Penson, Chairman of the War Trade Intelligence Department
Edward Penton, Junior, in charge of Boot Section, Royal Army Clothing Department
Frederick George Panizzi Preston, Chairman of Messrs. J. Stone & Company, Ltd., Deptford
Sir Frederick Alexander Robertson, Chairman of the Central Council of United Alien Relief Societies
Robert Robertson DSc FRS Superintending Chemist, Research Department, Woolwich Arsenal
Herbert Babington Rowell, Member of the Admiralty Shipbuilding Council
Harry Smith, Chairman of the Keighley Board of Management, Ministry of Munitions
Charles John Stewart, Public Trustee
Thomas James Storey, Member of the Committee and Chairman of the Classification Committed of Lloyd's Register of Shipping
Percy Kendall Stothert, Chairman of the West of England Board of Management, Ministry of Munitions
The Rt. Hon. Sir Thomas Vezey Strong KCVO Chairman, City of London Tribunal
Lt.-Col. Campbell Stuart, Vice-Chairman of London Headquarters of British Mission to the United States of America
Charles Sykes, Director of Wool Textile Production and Chairman of the Board of Control of the Worsted Woollen Trades
William Henry Thompson MD DSc Scientific Adviser to the Ministry of Food
William Rowan-Thomson, Director of Auxiliary Ships Engines, Controller's Department, Admiralty
Frank Warner, President of the Silk Association
Lt.-Col. Alfred Cholmeley Earle Welby, Secretary of the Royal Patriotic Fund Corporation
British India
Maj. His Highness Raj Rajeshwar Maharajadhiraja Sumer Singh Bahadur, of Jodhpur
Commonwealth of Australia
James William Barrett CMG MD for services in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society in Egypt, etc.
Rear-Admiral William Clarkson CMG Royal Australian Navy, for services in connection with the control and reorganisation of coastal shipping
Edward Owen Cox, Chairman, Overseas Shipping Committee
Lt.-Col. George Steward, for services to the Commonwealth Government
Dominion of New Zealand
Sir William Lee, Baron Plunket GCMG KCVO for services in connection with the New Zealand War Contingent Association
Egypt and the Sudan
Maj. Lee Oliver FitzMaurice Stack CMG Reserve of Officers, Acting Sirdar and Governor-General of the Sudan
Newfoundland
The Hon. Patrick Thomas McGrath LLD President of the Legislative Council, Food Controller, Secretary of the Patriotic Fund, and Chairman of the Pensions and Disabilities Board
Crown Colonies, Protectorates, etc.
The Most Reverend Maurus Caruana, Archbishop, Bishop of Malta
Sir Everard Ferdinand im Thurn KCMG CB Vice-Chairman, King George and Queen Mary's Club for the Oversea Forces
Brig.-Gen.-General Sir William Henry Manning KCMG CB Capt.-General and Governor-in-Chief of the Island of Jamaica
Lawrence Aubrey Wallace CMG Administrator of Northern Rhodesia
Sir Arthur Henderson Young GCMG Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the Straits Settlements
Honorary Knight Commander
His Highness Ibrahim, Sultan of the State and Territory of Johor GCMG
Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE)[edit]
Military Division[edit]
Lt.-Col. John Hubback Anderson, Assistant Director of Medical Services, Australian Imperial Force
Col. Frederick John Angell, Assistant Director of Ordnance Services, Southern Command
Lt.-Col. James Forrest Halkett Carmichael, Assistant Controller, Raw Materials (Non-Ferrous), Ministry of Munitions
Maj. Augustus Basil Holt Clerke, Royal Field Artillery, Director, Messrs. Hadfields, Ltd., Sheffield
Maj. The Hon. Leonard Harrison Cripps, 4th Hussars; Assistant Controller, Stores Department, Ministry of Munitions
Col. Stuart Davidson, Royal Engineers, Chief Technical Examiner for Works Services, War Office
Lt.-Col. Robert Maxwell Dennistoun KC Deputy Judge Advocate General, Canadian Forces
Col. Sir William Yorke Foster Bt Late Assistant Adjutant General, Southern Command
Col. Joseph Gaskell VD DL JP Vice-Chairman (Acting Chairman), Glamorgan Territorial Force Association
Brevet Col. St. John Corbet Gore CB
Lt.-Col. Geoffrey Gladstone Helbert, Staff of High Commissioner for South Africa
Maj. Thomas Gerard Hetherington, Services in connection with the origination of Tanks
Lt.-Col. John Tweedy Lewtas, Commissioner for Medical Services, Ministry of National Service
Col. James Reynolds McLean, Deputy Director-General of Recruiting
Col. Valentine Matthews VD Inspector of Rest Houses, London District
Col. Robert Dawson Rudolf, Consultant in Medicine, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Col. The Hon. George John Smith, Assistant Director of Contracts, Admiralty; New Zealand Military Forces
Col. Robert Ward Tate, Adjutant-General to the New Zealand Forces
Lt.-Col. Francis William Towle, Royal Army Service Corps; Inspector of Q.M. General's Services; Member of the Tobacco and Matches Control Board
Col. Gerald Verner White, Director of Timber Operations, Canadian Forestry Corps
Lt.-Col. John Williams, Australian Imperial Force; Commanding Anzac Provost Corps
For services in connection with the War in France, Egypt and Salonika 

Hugh Garvin Goligher, Financial Adviser, British Expeditionary Force
Helen Charlotte Isabella Gwynne-Vaughan, Chief Controller, Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps
Lt.-Col. Edward William Horne
Lt.-Col. Sydney George Partridge, Army Printing and Stationery Services, General Headquarters, France
Civil Division[edit]
John Arthur Aiton, Chairman, Derbyshire Munitions Board of Management
Maj. Charles Aldington, Superintendent of the Line, Great Western Railway
Ernest Joshua Allen, Director, Railway Materials, Ministry of Munitions
Ernest King Allen, Assistant Public Trustee
Richard William Allen JP Director and Manager of Messrs. W. H. Allen, Son & Company, Bedford
Lawrence Alma-Tadema, Joint Founder of the Polish Relief Fund for Great Britain
Adelaide Mary Anderson, Principal Lady Inspector of Factories
William James Anderson, Honorary Treasurer, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Mildred Harriet, Lady Anstruther
John Apsey, Manager, Constructive Department, H.M. Dockyard, Portsmouth
Cecil Henry Armitage DL County Director, Derbyshire, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
George Henry Ashdown ISO Deputy Director of Stores, Admiralty
Maj. Frank Ashley, British Red Cross Commissioner, Malta
Ellen, Lady Askwith, Ladies Auxiliary Committee (Munitions Section), Y.M.C.A.
Frederick Joseph Bacon Treasury Valuer and Inspector of Rates
Bernal Bagshawe, Chairman, Leeds Forge Company Ltd., Leeds
David Bain, Controller of Timber Supplies for Gun Ammunition Filling Department, Ministry of Munitions
Frank Baines MVO Principal Architect, H.M. Office of Works
James Alan Noel Barlow, Deputy Controller, Labour Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Benjamin Barrios, Oscar Theodore Barrow CSI Assistant Controller of Finance, Ministry of Munitions
Col. Thomas Elwood Lindesay Bate CIE Late County Secretary, County of London, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
John Harper Bean, Director, Messrs. A. Harper, Sons and Bean Ltd., Dudley
Gerald Bellhouse, Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories
Blanche Vere, Countess of Bessborough, Honorary Secretary, Y.M.C.A. Auxiliary Committee for France
Alfred Carleton Blyth, Managing Director, Hayes Filling Factory, Ministry of Munitions
Hereward Kenius Brackenbury, Manager of Torpedo Shops, Messrs. Sir W. G. Armstrong, Whitworth & Company, Ltd.
Thomas John Bradley, Principal Clerk, Exchequer and Audit Department
Benjamin Broadbent JP
Lt.-Col. Alfred Claude Bromhead
Arthur David Brooks, Lord Mayor of Birmingham; Chairman of Birmingham Local Tribunal
James Brown, Deputy Chairman and Managing Director, Scott's Shipbuilding and Engineering Company, Ltd.
Francis Morgan Bryant MVO ISO Secretary of H.M. the King's Private Secretary's Office
James Herbert Brydon, Acting County Director, Honorary County Secretary and Treasurer, Cheshire, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Lindsay Budd, Chairman, Virgin Metals Committee, Ministry of Munitions
Kathleen Burke
Capt. Sydney Bernard Burney, Assistant Director General of Voluntary Organizations
Geoffrey Butler, Department of Information, Foreign Office
Thomas Sivewright Catto, Ministry of Shipping
Fernley John Chamberlain, Assistant Secretary and Chief of Staff to the National Council of Young Men's Christian Associations
Brig.-Gen.-General Harry Anthony Chandos-Pole-Gell, Chairman, Derbyshire War Agricultural Executive Committee
Professor Frederic John Cheshire, Adviser on Scientific Side of Optical Munitions Branch, Ministry of Munitions
Clementine Churchill, Ladies Auxiliary Committee (Munitions Section), Y.M.C.A.
Maynard Willoughby Colchester-Wemyss DL JP Acting Chief Constable of Gloucestershire
Maj. Charles John Bowen Cooke, Chief Mechanical Engineer, London and North Western Railway
Maj. Edwin Charles Cox, Superintendent of the Line, South Eastern and Chatham Railway
Maj. Edward Yorke Daniel, Secretary of the Historical Section of the Committee of Imperial Defence
Albert Davidson, Managing Director, Messrs. Hattersley and Davidson Ltd., Sheffield
Charles Llewelyn Davies, Assistant Paymaster-General
Ernest Davies, Deputy Inspector under the Aliens Act
Henry William Carless Davis, Deputy Chairman, War Trade Intelligence Department
John Samuel Champion Davis DL VD County Director, Devonshire, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Howard d'Egville, Honorary Secretary of the United Kingdom Branch of the Empire Parliamentary Association; Commissioner under the Military Service (Civil Liabilities) Committee
Edward Evershed Dendy, Chairman, Semi-manufactured Metals Committee, Ministry of Munitions
Arthur Lewis Dixon, Assistant Secretary, Home Office
Capt. The Hon. Charles Joseph Thaddeus Dormer, Royal Navy, Chairman of the Admiralty Licensing Sub-Committee, War Trade Department
Col. Charles William Ernest Duncombe TD County Director, West Yorkshire, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Frances Hermia Durham, Chief Woman Inspector at Central Offices of Employment Department, Ministry of Labour
Arthur James Dyke, Assistant Secretary, Board of Customs and Excise
Agnes Murray Ebden, Deputy President, Hastings Division, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Ethel Edgar, Ladies Auxiliary Committee (Munitions Section), Y.M.C.A.
George Edwards, Auditor and Controller, Imperial Munitions Board, Canada
William James Evans, Principal Clerk, Secretary's Department, Admiralty
Peter Dewar Ewing, General Manager, Ailsa Shipbuilding Company, Troon
John Edward Ferard, Assistant Secretary (Officiating Secretary), Judicial and Public Department, India Office
Capt. Matthew Benjamin Dipnall Ffinch JP Assistant Chief Constable in Charge of Special Constabulary, Essex
William John Fieldhouse JP
Edward FitzGerald, Assistant to Chairman, Imperial Munitions Board, Canada
William Joseph Fitzherbert-Brockholes DL JP Chairman, Lancashire War Agricultural Executive Committee
Lt.-Col. Herbert Lindsay Fitzpatrick, Red Cross Commissioner, Salonika
Horace Shepherd Folker, Head of Equipment Department, Headquarters Staff, British Red Cross Society, London
Maj. John Henry Follows, Acting General Superintendent, Midland Railway
Edward Rodolph Forber, Secretary, Military Service (Civil Liabilities) Committee
George Herbert Fowler, Hydrographic Department, Admiralty
Capt. George Charles Frederick, Royal Navy, Shipping Intelligence Officer, Liverpool
George Samuel Fry, Formerly Accountant-General of the Board of Trade; Member of the Coal Exports Committee
Thomas Alexander Fyfe, Sheriff Substitute of Lanarkshire; Chairman, Glasgow Munitions Tribunal
Frank Walls Garnett JP President of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons
Lt.-Col. Frank Garrett TD Chairman, Messrs. Garrett and Sons, Leiston
Heathcote William Garrod, Deputy Controller, Labour Regulation Department, Ministry of Munitions
Laura Gwendolen Gascoigne, Commandant, Lotherton Hall Auxiliary Hospital, Aberford, West Yorkshire
Stephen Gaselee, Department of Information, Foreign Office
Mager Frederic Gauntlett CIE Late Secretary, Shipyard Labour Department, Admiralty
loan Gwilym Gibbon, Principal of the Department dealing with Military Service Tribunals, Local Government Board
Victoria Florence de Burgh Gibbs, Vice-President, Long Ashton Division of Somersetshire, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
David Gilmour, Formerly Resident Engineer, now Member of Board of Management, H.M. Factory, Gretna, Ministry of Munitions
Henry Glendinning, Chemical Director, Messrs. Brunner Mond and Co., Limited, Northwich
Lewis Gordon, Deputy Controller, Small Arms Ammunition, Ministry of Munitions
Col. George Joachim, Viscount Goschen, Director of Labour Division, Food Production Department
Robert Ernest Graves, Deputy Commissioner of Trade Exemptions Department, Ministry of National Service
Maj. William Wylie Grierson, Chief Engineer, Great Western Railway
Rosamund, Lady Henry Grosvenor, Ladies Auxiliary Committee (Munitions Section), Y.M.C.A.
Maj. Anselm Verner Lee Guise, Director of Stores, British Red Cross Society, Boulogne
Frances Bett, Lady Hadfield, Donor and Administrator, No. 5 Hospital, Wimereux, France
Arthur Edward Hadley, Assistant Controller of Inspection of Munitions, Ministry of Munitions
Ernest Varley Haigh, Controller, Trench Warfare Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Arthur Henry Hall, Director of Torpedoes and Mines Production, Controller's Department, Admiralty
John Harrison, Chairman of the City of Edinburgh Local Tribunal
Ralph Endersby Harwood, Secretary of the War Trade Statistical Department
William Hawk JP Chairman, Cornwall War Agricultural Executive Committee
Alfred Ernest William Hazel LLD Deputy Controller, Priority Department, Ministry of Munitions
Alexander Pearce Higgins LLD Lecturer on International Law at Cambridge, and President of the Society of Public Teachers of Law
Professor William Richard Hodgkinson FRS Professor of Chemistry and Metallurgy, Ordnance College, Woolwich
Arthur William Holmes, Director of Contracts, Royal Commission on Wheat Supplies
Collingwood Hope KC Chairman, Essex Appeal Tribunal
John Wilson Hope, Chairman of the Committee for the Purchase of Army Camp Refuse
Leonard Thomas Horne, Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Pensions
Lancelot Worthy Horne, Superintendent of the Line, London & North Western Railway
George Henry Hunt ISO Accountant, Treasury
Summers Hunter, Member of the Admiralty Shipbuilding Council
Cyril William Hurcomb, Deputy Director of Commercial Services, Ministry of Shipping
Rear-Admiral Edward Fitzmaurice Inglefield, Royal Navy, Secretary of Lloyd's Register of Shipping
Daniel Jackson, Partner and Head of Shipyard, Messrs. Denny Brothers, Dumbarton
Lt.-Commander Basil Oliver Jenkins RNVR Member in charge of Aviation, British War Mission, United States of America
Walter St. David Jenkins, Assistant Director of Contracts, Admiralty
Harry Marshall Jonas, Member of Valuation Advisory Committee, Controlled Establishment Branch, Ministry of Munitions
Charles Henry Jones, Registrar-General of Shipping and Seamen
Frederick McCulloch Jowitt
Harold Godfrey Judd, Deputy Controller, Contracts Department, Ministry of Munitions
Walter George Kent, of Messrs. George Kent, Ltd., Luton
Robert Killin, Superintendent of the Line, Caledonian Railway
Alfred Clive Lawrence, Head of the Intelligence Branch of the Procurator-General's Department
Florence Edith Victoria Leach, Controller of Inspections, Women's Army Auxiliary Corps
Rudolf Gustav Karl Lempfert FRMetS Superintendent of the Forecast Division, Meteorological Office
Norman Alexander Leslie, Ministry of Shipping
Edgar Stanford London, Deputy Chief Inspector of Taxes, Inland Revenue
Arthur Lucas, Deputy Director, Department of Import Restrictions, Board of Trade
William Joseph Luke, Shipyard Director, Messrs. John Brown & Company, Ltd., Clydebank
William Royse Lysaght JP Technical Adviser, Non-Ferrous Materials Department, Ministry of Munitions
Horacio George Arthur Mackie, His Majesty's Consul-General, Buenos Aires
James Borrowman MacLean, Controller, Gun Manufacture, Ministry of Munitions
William Turner MacLellan JP Assistant Controller, Iron and Steel Production, Ministry of Munitions
Frederick Larkins MacLeod, Adviser on Foreign Iron Ores, Ministry of Munitions
Terence Charles Macnaghten, Principal Clerk, Colonial Office
Charles Cornelius Maconochie KC Sheriff of the Lothians and Peebles; Chairman of the Lothian Appeal Tribunal
Edmund John Maginness MVO Manager, Constructive Department, H.M. Dockyard, Chatham
James Rochfort Maguire, Ladies Auxiliary Committee (Munitions Section), Y.M.C.A.
George Malcolm
Alfred Mansfield, Director of Oils and Fats
James Marr JP Member of the Admiralty Shipbuilding Council
Thomas Rodgerson Marsden, Managing Director, Messrs. Platt Brothers & Company, Oldham
Wing-Capt. Edward Alexander Dimsdale Masterman, Royal Naval Air Service
Arthur Stanley Mather JP Chairman, Lancashire (West Derby Hundred) Appeal Tribunal
Richard Edward Lloyd Maunsell, Mechanical Engineer, South Eastern and Chatham Railway
Oliver Hill McCowen LLB Secretary in Charge of Y.M.C.A. work in France
The Hon. Henry Duncan McLaren MP Director, Area Organisation, Ministry of Munitions
William Bentley McMillan JP Provost of Greenock
Harry Bell Measures MVO Director of Barrack Construction, War Office
His Honour Judge Francis Hamilton Mellor KC Chairman, Lancashire (Salford Hundred) Appeal Tribunal
Frank Herbert Mitchell, Assistant Director, Official Press Bureau
Maj. Robert Mitchell, Director of Training, Ministry of Pensions
William Mitchell-Thomson MP Director of the Restriction of Enemy Supplies Department
Col. James Alexander Lawrence Montgomery, British Red Cross Commissioner, East Africa
Lt.-Col. Charles Langbridge Morgan, Late Chief Engineer, London, Brighton and South Coast Railway
Hopkin Morgan JP Chairman, Glamorganshire County Council; Mayor of Neath; Chairman, West Glamorganshire Appeal Tribunal
Thomas Harry Mottram, Divisional Inspector of Mines; Chairman of Colliery Recruiting Courts, Yorkshire and North Midlands Division
William Arthur Mount MP Civil Member of Claims Commission, War Office
Conrad James Naef, Deputy Accountant-General of the Navy
Daniel Neylan, Chief Accountant, War Office; late Financial Adviser to the Salonika Expeditionary Force
Thomas Norton DL JP Chairman, Yorkshire West Riding Appeal Tribunal
Arthur Eugene O'Neill, Ministry of Shipping
Lt.-Col. Claude Bowes Palmer DL County Director, Northumberland and Durham, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Maj. Edward Howard Thornbrough Parsons, Chief Constable, Metropolitan Police
James Peech, Adviser on Shell Steel, Ministry of Munitions
His Honour Judge George Bettesworth Piggott, Chairman of Special Local Tribunal for London and Member of London Appeal Tribunal
Henry Howard Piggots, Assistant Secretary, Parliamentary and General, Ministry of Munitions
Charles Ralph Pinder, Resident Engineer, H.M. Factory, Oldbury; formerly Construction Manager, H.M. Factory, Queensferry, and H.M. Factory, Avonmouth, Ministry of Munitions
Henry Pledge, Assistant Director of Naval Construction, Admiralty
William Jackson Pope FRS Professor of Chemistry, University of Cambridge; Member of Panel of Board of Invention and Research, Admiralty
Helen Matilda, Lady Procter, Chairman, Munition Workers Welfare Committee, Y.W.C.A.
James Railton, Partner in the Firm of Messrs. Topham, Jones and Railton
Harry Rawson DL JP Chairman, City of Edinburgh Territorial Force Association
George Grey Rea JP Member of the President of the Board of Agriculture's Committee Food Production Advisory
Lt.-Col. Hugh Reid VD DL Member of War Executive and of the Scottish National Red Cross and Ralston Hospital Committee of the Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Arthur John Relton, Member of the Aircraft Insurance Committee
Brevet Lt.-Col. Thomas Duncan Rhind, Controller of Statistics, Ministry of National Service
John Richie Richmond, Managing Director of Messrs. J. M. Weir, Ltd., Cathcart
Gervase Henry Roberts, Superintendent, Mechanical Engineering Department, Woolwich Arsenal
John Robertson, Provost of the Burgh of Paisley; Chairman of the local National Service and Food Control Committees; Member of Appeal Tribunal
William Robinson, Financial Secretary, India Office
William Arthur Robinson CB Assistant Secretary, H.M. Office of Works
Corisande Evelyn Vere, Baroness Rodney, Y.M.C.A. Worker
Archibald John Campbell Ross, Member of the Admiralty Shipbuilding Council
John Rowland MVO JP Late Chief Commissioner of National Service, Wales
Matthew Adkins Rundell, Government representative on the London group of War Risks Associations; Government representative on the Fishing Vessels War Risks Insurance Association
Edward Russell Clarke MBE Expert Adviser to the Naval Staff on Wireless Telegraphy
Nils Percy Patrick Sandberg, Director of Inspection of Steel (Land Service), Ministry of Munitions, and Associate Member of Ordnance Committee
Charles John Ough Sanders, Superintendent for Wrecks and Loss of Life at Sea; in the Marine Department, Board of Trade
Capt. William Stephen Sanders, Secretary to the British Section of the International Socialist Party
William Samuel Sarel, Assistant Accountant-General of the Navy
Maj. Finlay Forbes Scott, Superintendent of the Line, London, Brighton and South Coast Railway
Col. John Scott-Riddell MVO TD Red Cross Commissioner for North Eastern District of Scotland
Albert Senior JP Principal Partner, Messrs. G., Senior & Sons, Ltd., Sheffield
John Davenport Siddeley, Managing Director of the Siddeley-Deasy Co., Ltd.
William Anker Simmons JP Agricultural Adviser, Ministry of Food
Arthur William Smallwood
Frederick Smith, Assistant Director of Materials and Priority, Controller's Department, Admiralty, New Zealand Expeditionary Force
Launcelot Eustace Smith, Chairman and Managing Director, Messrs. Smith's Dock Company, Ltd., Tyne Branch
Thomas Octave Murdoch Sopwith, Chairman and Test and Experimental Manager of Sopwith Aviation Co., Ltd.
William Spens, Foreign Trade Department
Ernest Edward William Squires, General Manager, Metropolitan Carriage, Wagon & Finance Company, Ltd., Birmingham
Josiah Charles Stamp DSc Assistant Secretary to the Board of Inland Revenue
Lockhart Stephens MRCS DL County Director, Hampshire British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Frances Louise Stevenson, Private Secretary to the Prime Minister
Thomas Henry Craig Stevenson MD Superintendent of Statistics, General Register Office
Mary Margaret Stewart-Mackenzie
William Chester Still, Senior Partner of Messrs. W. M. Still and Sons
John William Stone, Surveyor of Lands, Director of Works Department, Admiralty
Lucy Granville Streatfeild, Member of Soldiers Dependants Assessment Appeals Committee
John Stuart, Managing Director, Messrs. Ross, Ltd., London
The Hon. Violet Stuart-Wortley, Ladies Secretary to the Headquarters Committee, Y.M.C.A.
The Hon. Reginald Gilbert Murray Talbot, Chairman, London Munitions Tribunal
Frank Tatlow, Deputy General Manager, Midland Railway
Lt.-Col. Percy Crosland Tempest, Chief Engineer, South Eastern and Chatham Railway
Capt. William Hugh Tomasson MVO Chief Constable of Nottinghamshire and Acting Inspector of Constabulary
Wynn Harold Tregoning, Ministry of Shipping; a Membef of the Ship Licensing Committee
Joseph Harling Turner JP
John James Virgo, National Field Secretary to the Y.M.C.A.
Lt.-Col. David Wallace CMG Red Cross Commissioner for Eastern District of Scotland
Hugh Walpole
Evelyn Mayura Walters, Honorary Secretary, Kensington Division, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem; Organiser of the Weir Hospital, Balham
Lady Susan Elizabeth Clementine Waring, Donor and Administrator, Auxiliary Hospital for Convalescent Officers, Lennel, Coldstream, Berwick
Maj. Henry Angus Watson, General Superintendent, North Eastern Railway
Alexander Strahan Watt, Lawrence WeaverDirector of Supplies Division, Food Production Department
Harry James Webb, Royal Corps of Naval Constructors; Chief Constructor and Superintendent, Dockyard Branch, Controller's Department, Admiralty
Philip George Lancelot Webb, Deputy Controller of Petrol Department, Board of Trade
Wilfred Howard Williams, Director of Inland Transport, Ministry of Munitions
Col. Frederic Herbert Williamson, Royal Engineers, Director of Army Postal Service (Home); Principal Clerk, Secretary's Office, General Post Office
John William Willis-Bund JP Chairman, Worcestershire County Council; Chairman, Worcestershire Appeal Tribunal; Chairman, Worcestershire National Relief Fund
Horace John Wilson, Secretary to Committee on Production, Ministry of Labour
John James Withers
Humbert Wolfe, Controller, Labour Regulation Department, Ministry of Munitions
Edith Amelia, Baroness Wolverton, Ladies Auxiliary Committee (Munitions Section), Y.M.C.A.
Professor Thomas Barlow Wood, Drapers Professor of Agriculture in the University of Cambridge; Adviser on Meat Production to the President of the Board of Agriculture, and Chief Executive Officer, Army Cattle Purchase Scheme
Alfred Woodgate, Assistant Secretary to the Ministry of Shipping
Raymond Wybrow Woods, Chief Clerk, Treasury Solicitor's Department
Thomas Worthington, Late Head of the Commercial Intelligence Department of the Board of Trade
Maj. Lionel Maling Wynch CIE Secretary to Red Cross Commissioner, France
Lt.-Col. Charles John Wyndham, Late County Director, Sussex, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Harold Edgar Yarrow, Director of Messrs. Yarrow & Company
John Horatio Yolland, Chief of Staff of County Director, Kent, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
George Udny Yule, Director of Requirements, Ministry of Food
For services in connection with the War in France, Egypt and Salonika 

Arthur Beagley Beavis, Financial Adviser, British Salonika Force
Rachel, Countess of Dudley, Honorary Superintendent, No. 32 Stationary Hospital, France; Honorary Superintendent, Expeditionary Force, Officers' Clubs and Rest Houses
Lady Mabelle Annie Egerton, in charge of Station Coffee Stall, Rouen
Robert Godfrey Peckitt, Chief Mechanical Engineer, Egyptian State Railways
British India
Jeanie, Lady Meston, Head of the branch of the Red Cross in Allahabad
Lt.-Col. Frank Popham Young CIE Indian Army, Commissioner, Rawalpindi Division, Punjab
Sir Robert Swan Highet, Agent, East Indian Railway, Calcutta
Nawab Sir Faridoon Daula Bahadur KCIE CSI Assistant Political Minister to His Highness the Nizam's Government
Montagu de Pomeroy Webb CIE Manager, Forbes, Forbes, Campbell and Co., Karachi, Bombay Presidency
Commonwealth of Australia
Mary Antill, Organiser, War Chest Fund, Sydney
Henry Ebenezer Budden, Organiser, Overseas Australian Comforts Funds
Guillaume Daniel Delprat, for services in connection with steel supplies, etc.
Mary, Lady Hennessy, Organiser, Victorian Branch, Australian Comforts Fund
Beatrice Henty, Secretary, Australian Comforts Fund, Melbourne
Maj. Frank de Villiers Lamb, for services in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society in England and Egypt
Clare Lyle
Hugh Victor McKay, for services in connection with war industries
Orme Masson
Eliza Fraser Mitchell, for services in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society in England and Australia
Lt.-Col. William James Norman Oldershaw, for services in connection with the Commonwealth Shipping Board
Frances Mary Woolcott, Honorary Organiser of the Button Fund
William James Young, for services in connection with Shipping
Dominion of New Zealand
Jacobina Luke
Christina Allan Massey
Robert Howard Nolan, Honorary Secretary, New Zealand Soldiers' Club
Theresa Dorothea, Lady Ward
Oriana Fanny Wilson
Egypt and the Sudan
Ernest Macleod Dowson, Director-General of Survey Department
Cecil Gordon Crawley, in charge of the Government Arsenals
Wasey Sterry, Chief Justice in the Sudan
George Eustace Burnett-Stuart, Director of Personnel in Ministry of Interior
Newfoundland
The Hon. James Augustus Clift KC Acting Minister of Agriculture and Mines, Vice-Chairman of the Standing Committee of the Patriotic Association, Member of the Recruiting Committee and the Pensions Board
Union of South Africa
Hester Marion Carter, of the Red Cross and Comforts Committee, Cape Town
Ernest Chappell, Chairman of the Johannesburg Branch of the Comforts Committee
Douglas Christopherson, Vice-Chairman, Johannesburg Local Committee, Governor-General's Fund, and Chairman of the Disabled Soldiers Board, Johannesburg
The Hon. Eleanor Birch Wilson-Fox, Chairman, South African Comforts Committee in London
Jessie Dodd, Lady Rose-Innes
Thomas Slingsby Nightingale CMG Secretary to the High Commissioner in London for the Union of South Africa
Evelyn Ashley Wallers, President of the Transvaal Chamber of Mines
Crown Colonies, Protectorates, etc.
Andrew Agnew, Chairman of River Craft Committee, Member of Food Control and Shipping Committee, and Commandant of the Civil Guard, Straits Settlements
Thomas Alexander Vans Best CMG Administering the Government of the Leeward Islands
Ethel Dorothy Bowring, for services to the East African Expeditionary Force
Francis George Bury, Honorary Treasurer, King George and-Queen Mary's Club for the Oversea Forces
Thomas Fraser Burrowes, Comptroller of Customs and Receiver of Enemy Estates, Nigeria
William Morris-Carter, Chief Justice of His Majesty's High Court of Uganda, and Chairman of the Uganda Supplies Board
Elizabeth Lydia Rosabelle, Lady Clifford, for charitable services in the Gold Coast Colony
Henry Lawson De Mel, for services to the Government of Ceylon
Sir Frederick Evans KCMG KCVO for services to the Government of Gibraltar
Henry Cowper Gollan KC Attorney-General and Chairman of the Food Committee of the Colony of Trinidad and Tobago
Richard Allmond Jeffrey Goode, Secretary to the Administration, Northern Rhodesia
Francis.Charles Jenkin, Deputy Superintendent, Special Police Reserve, Hong Kong
Reginald Fleming Johnston, District Officer and Magistrate, Weihaiwei
Joseph Horsford Kemp, Attorney-General of the Colony of Hong Kong
Albert Ernest Kiteon, Director, Geological Survey Department, Gold Coast Colony
Henry Marks, Member of the Executive and Legislative Councils of the Colony of Fiji; for services to various patriotic funds
Mary Ethel, Baroness Methuen, for services to the sick and wounded in Malta
Alice, Lady Miles, President of the-Red Cross and other funds, Gibraltar
Nana Ofori Atta, Paramount Chief of Akin Abuakwa; for services to the Government of the Gold-Coast Colony
Alexander Ransford Slater CMG Colonial Secretary of the Gold Coast Colony, for special services in connection with recruiting
Hippolyte Louis Wiehe du Coudray Souchon, Representative in London of the Mauritius' Chamber of Agriculture
Honorary Commanders of the said Most Excellent Order
Abubakar Garbai, Shehu of Borno, for services in connection with the Cameroon Campaign
Sheikh Ali bin Salim, Assistant Liwali, Mombasa
Muhammadu Abba, Emir of Yola, for services in connection with the Cameroon Campaign
Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE)[edit]
Military Division[edit]
Col. Augustus Mervyn Owen Anwyl Anwyl-Passingham, Recruiting Region Commander
Lt.-Col. Francis Logie Armstrong, in charge of Canadian Records
Maj. Edward George Graham Talbot Baines, York and Lancaster Regiment; Secretary, Nottingham Territorial Force Association
Lt.-Col. Richard Bell-Irving, Instructor, Royal Flying Corps
Maj. Lionel Oxborrow Betts, Australian Army Medical Corps
Lt.-Col. Gerald Walker Birks, Officer in Charge of Canadian Y.M.C.A. Services
Capt. Archibald Campbell Black, 7th Battalion, Royal Scots; Ministry of National Service
Maj. Frederick Blakemore, Army Pay Department
Maj. William Henry Booth DSO East Kent Regiment; Deputy Assistant Director of Railway Transport, Scottish Command
Capt. Francis Stewart Evelyn Boothby, Secretary, Lincoln Territorial Force Association
Maj. John Bowden, Royal Engineers, Late Superintending Engineer, Ministry of Munitions, No. 2 Area (North-West England)
Capt. Arthur Boyd, Royal Army Service Corps; General Secretary, Navy and Army Canteen Board
Capt. William Burton, York and Lancaster Regiment; Member of Anglo-Russian Sub-Committee, New York, Ministry of Munitions
Maj. Charles Ernest Alfred French Somerset Butler, Earl of Carrick, Royal Army Service Corps; Adjutant-General's Department, War Office
Capt. William Stephen Cauvin, Adjutant-General's Department, War Office
Maj. Henry Edward Chaney, Headquarters. Training Division, Royal Flying Corps
Maj. Sir Jocelyn Brudenell, Earl of Chichester, 5th Battalion, Royal Sussex Regiment; Adjutant-General's Department, War Office
Capt. George Clark, Royal Artillery, Superintending Officer in Artillery Branch, War Office
Maj. Thomas Dudley Cocke, Royal Army Service Corps; Section Director, Finance Department, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Charles Leonard Conacher, Late in charge, Perivale Filling Factory, Ministry of Munitions
Lt.-Col. Charles Paston Crane DSO York and Lancaster Regiment
Maj. Francis Samuel Creswell, Park Commander, Royal Flying Corps
Lt.-Col. Sir Charles Cuyler Bt Commanding 43rd Regimental District Recruiting Area
Lt.-Col. Richard Frederick Drury, attd. Royal Flying Corps
Lt.-Col. Earle Calder Duffin, Assistant Q.M. General, Canadian Forces
Maj. Henry Stuart Ebben, Deputy Assistant Adjutant-General, Royal Flying Corps
Col. Henry John Edwards CB TD Commanding Officer, No. 2 Officers Cadet Battalion
Henrietta Christobel Ellis, Commandant of the Motor Transport Section, Women's Legion
Capt. Edward George Robert Fairholme, Royal Army Veterinary Corps; Chief Secretary, Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
Capt. Charles Stanley Fisher, Acting Solicitor for Navy and Army Canteen Board
Col. Walter Blunt Fletcher, Secretary, Wiltshire Territorial Force Association
Capt. Otto Tennent Eastman Freiligrath, Royal Army Service Corps; Staff Capt., War Office
Maj. George Arthur Fulcher, Royal Artillery, Deputy Assistant Director, Ordnance Department, War Office
Capt. Henry Game, Royal Field Artillery; Design Department, Ministry of Munitions
Lt.-Col. Jack Giffard, Royal Field Artillery; Member of Anglo-Russian Sub-Committee, New York, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Walter Brudenell Gill, Royal Engineers, Military Intelligence Branch, War Office
Lt.-Col. Edward Shirley Godman, Dorsetshire Regiment; Assistant Provost-Marshal
Lt. Ernest Goodwin, Technical Adviser on Explosives to Trench Warfare Department, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Walter Herbert Lewis Goolden, Research Department, Woolwich
Capt. Gilbert Maxwell Adair Graham. Quarter Master-General's Department, War Office
Maj. James Alexander Green, South African Forces, Administrative Headquarters
Maj. Francis Grehan, Norfolk Regiment; Secretary, Norfolk Territorial Force Association
Capt. Wilfrid Edward Hiley, Research Department, Woolwich
Capt. Archibald Vivian Hill, Cambridgeshire Regiment; Munitions Inventions Department
Capt. William John Honey
Hilda Horniblow, Deputy Commandant, Military Cooking Section, Women's Legion
Maj. Cecil Harry St. Leger Howard, Recruiting Area Commander
Capt. Edward Maurice Berkeley Ingram, General Staff, War Office
Arthur Godfrey James, Royal Army Service Corps; Ministry of National Service
Maj. Charles Jarrott, Inspector of Mechanical Transport, Royal Flying Corps
Maj. Harold Driver Jonas, Deputy Chief Valuer and Compensation Officer, Directorate of Lands, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Thomas Athol Joyce, General Staff, War Office
Lt.-Col. William Kingston, Royal Engineers, Chief Inspector of Works, War Office
Capt. John Learmont DL JP Secretary, Cumberland Territorial Force Association
Capt. James Arthur Leeming, Royal Engineers, Section Director, Trench Warfare Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Maj. Hugh Bennett Lewers, Assistant Director of Medical Services, Australian Imperial Forces
Capt. Francis Vivian Lister, Trench Warfare Research Department, Ministry of Munitions
Violet Beatrix Alice Lambton Long, Late Secretary of Women's Legion, Military Cooking Section
Lt.-Col. Cyril Douglas Hughes MacAlpine, Canadian Army Service Corps
Maj. John McAughey, Deputy Assistant Adjutant-General, Canadian Forces
The Reverend Edmond McAuliffe, Chaplain, 3rd Class, Australian Imperial Forces
The Reverend Angus MacDonald, Chaplain, 3rd Class, New Zealand Expeditionary Force
Maj. Thomas McKibbin, Deputy Assistant Director of Medical Services, New Zealand Expeditionary Force
Lt.-Col. Alexander Macmillan, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. John McPherson, Adjutant, New Zealand Command Depot
Capt. Henry Mansbridge, Secretary, London Territorial Force Association
Lt.-Col. Alexander Gordon Maxwell, Assistant Provost-Marshal
Col. Charles Stuart Meeres, Royal Artillery, Army Ordnance Corps Department
Capt. George Metson, Ministry of National Service
Maj. Alexander Montgomerie, Royal Newfoundland Regiment
Capt. Harold Moreland, Section Director, Trench Warfare Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Arthur Lenox Napier, Yorkshire Regiment; Secretary, Northumberland Territorial Force Association
Capt. Walter Elphinstone Nevill, Nairobi Defence Force
Capt. Richard William Alan, Earl of Onslow, General Staff, War Office
Capt. Charles Phipps John Ovans, King's Own Scottish Borderers; Manager, Leeds National Projectile Factory, Ministry of Munitions
Lt.-Col. Sydney Lewis Penhorwood, Director of Timber Operations, War Office
Lt.-Col. Hugh Wharton Perkins, Deputy Assistant Director of Railway Transport, Southern Command
Capt. Mansel Loudon Porter, King's Royal Rifle Corps; Secretary, Berkshire Territorial Force Association
Lt.-Col. Edwin Prismall TD Musketry Staff Officer, Canadian Forces
Capt. Alan Rae-Smith, Chief Accountant to Navy and Army Canteen Board
Brevet Major John Wakefield Rainey, Army Veterinary Corps
Lt.-Col. James Albert Reeks, Commanding 45th Regimental District Recruiting Area
Capt. Richard Gilbert Roberts, Instructor, Intelligence Corps
Lt.-Col. Alexander Fowler Roberts, Director of Artillery (Field), and Senior Embarkation Officer
Lt.-Col. Roddam John Roddam
Maj. Robert Francis Ruck-Keene, Royal Artillery, Secretary, Yorkshire (North Riding) Territorial Force Association
Edward John Russell DSc FRS Technical Adviser in the Food Production Department; Director of the Rothamsted Experimental Station
Capt. Cecil Myles Serjeantson, Secretary, Leicester and Rutland Territorial Force Association
Maj. Eric James Sexton, Commanding Australian Machine Gun Training Depot
Maj. Frederic Joseph Sharp, Remount Service
Lt.-Col. William Constable Shepherd, Commandant of Great Yarmouth
Maj. Philip George Moncrieff Skene, Late Deputy Assistant Director, Ordnance Department, War Office; Assistant Secretary, Russian Supplies Committee, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Rowland Hill Stainforth, Deputy Controller, Controlled Establishments Branch, Ministry of Munitions
Lt.-Col. Thomas Heron Steel, Australian Overseas Training Brigade
Lt. Valentine Beardmore Stewart, Late Manager, Messrs. William Beardmore & Company, Ltd., Glasgow
Maj. John Stuart, Assistant Inspector of Recruiting
Maj. Brian Gresley Elton Sunderland, Deputy Assistant Director of Artillery
Lt.-Col. Arthur Sykes, Royal Irish Fusiliers, Inspector of Army Catering
Capt. Kenneth Symes, Late Head of Armour Plate Section, Mechanical Warfare Department, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. John Barwick Thompson, Border Regiment, Ministry of National Service
Lt.-Col. Edward Newbury Thornton, South African Forces; South African Hospital, Richmond Park
Maj. Edwin Ernest Enever Todd, Army Pay Department
Edith Mary Trotter, Recruiting Controller, Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps
Lt.-Col. William Kington Tucker, Forage Department, War Office
Capt. Clement Vallange, Design Department, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Henry Edward van den Bergh, Chief Inspector and Controller, Buying Branch, Canteen Board
Maj. Francis Peter Vidal, Army Pay Department
Maj. James Taylor Watson, Embarkation Staff Officer, New Zealand Expeditionary Force
Capt. Gerald Hamilton Wicks, Trench Warfare Research Department, Ministry of Munitions
Lt.-Col. Arthur Cecil Williams, Director of Inspection, Optical Stores, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Charles Edward Williams, Section Director, Raw Materials Department, Ministry of Munitions
Brevet-Col. German Sims Woodhead VD RAMC
Lt.-Col. Anthony Hudson Woodifield, in charge of Ordnance Depot, Didcot
Capt. Charles Bernard Besly Yule, Royal Artillery, Design Department, Ministry of Munitions
For services in connection with the War in France, Egypt and Salonika 

Capt. John Herbert Boraston, Records Officer, Operations Section, General Headquarters, France
Capt. William Lawrence Bragg, Depot, Field Survey Company
Maj. William Henry Clifford, Army Printing and Stationery Services
The Reverend Edward Arnold Fitch, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt.-Col. Charles Edward Percy Fowler, RAMC
Maj. Francis Arthur Green, Army Printing and Stationery Services
Capt. Myles Higgin-Birket, Cipher Officer, General Headquarters, British Salonika Force
Maj. Percy Reginald Nelson, Assistant to Officer-in-charge of Expeditionary Force Canteens, France
Capt. Marcus Niebuhr Tod, Intelligence Corps, British Salonika Force
Lt.-Col. Edward Constable Wright, in charge of Expeditionary Force Canteens, France
Civil Division[edit]
James Adam, Office Supervisor Edinburgh, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Robert Adam, Late Assistant Director, Railway Materials Branch, Ministry of Munitions
Thomas Martland Ainscough, Secretary to the Textile Committee and to the Standing Committee on Cotton Growing in the Empire
Alexander Alcorn, Ministry of Shipping
Evelyn Julia Allan, Honorary Secretary, Chelsea Division, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
James Allan Chief Engineer, Ellerman Lines
Harry Allden Officer-in-Charge, Royal Naval Gun Factory, West Houghton
John Allen, Chairman, Steam Cultivation Development Association, and Hon. Adviser to the Food Production Department
Mary Sophia Allen, Chief Superintendent, Women's Police Service
Oswald Coleman Allen, Secretarial Officer, Ministry of Munitions
William George Allen, Expense Accounts Officer; H.M. Dockyard, Portsmouth
William Henry Allen, Vice-Controller, Post Office Stores Department
James Willcox Alsop JP Chairman, Liverpool Local Tribunal
Amy Douglas Knyveton Anderson, Commandant, Waverley Abbey Auxiliary Hospital, Farnham, Surrey
Lois Dessurne Anderson, Financial Expert Adviser to the Finance Section, Ministry of Blockade
Lt.-Commander Maxwell Henry Anderson, Royal Navy, Trade Division of the Naval Staff
Thomas George Anderson, Superintending Clerk Naval Ordnance Department, Admiralty
Henry William Archer Manager and Secretary of the British Fishing Vessels War Risks Insurance Association, Ltd.
Henry Armstrong, Secretary in Charge, North-Eastern Division, Y.M.C.A.
Janet Stevenson Bennett, Lady Arthur, Vice-President of the Troon District, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Commander Edward Lindsay Ashley Foakes, Royal Navy, Naval Assistant to Director of Army Postal Services, and Nautical Adviser to the Post Office
Peter Wilson Atkin JP Chairman of Salford Local Tribunal
Amos Lowrey Ayre, District Director of Shipyard Labour (Glasgow), Admiralty Shipyard Labour Department
Philip Henry Bagenal, Inspector, Local Government Board
Francis Edward Bagnall, Section Director, Machine Tool Department, Ministry of Munitions
Arthur Stowey Bailey, Manager, Messrs. Cammell, Laird & Company, Ltd., Sheffield
Hubert Baines, Deputy Chief Engineer, H.M. Office of Works
Alfred Gabriel Baker, Superintendent of Queen Mary's Workshops, Brighton
George Stephen Baker, Superintendent of the William Froude National Tank, National Physical Laboratory
John William Baker, Manager, Messrs John Baker & Co., Ltd., Rotherham
Robert John Balfour, Director of Finance, Metropolitan Special Constabulary
Charlotte Marie-Louise Banbury, Commandant, Wych Cross Place Auxiliary Hospital, Forest Row, Sussex
William Barber, Superintendent of Live Stock Division, Board of Agriculture for Scotland
Henry Lowthian Barge, Engineer to Messrs. Bullivant & Company, Ltd.
Ernest Augustus William Barnard, Superintending Civil Engineer, Director of Works Department, Admiralty
Anna Ethel Barnes, Secretary to Central Charities Committee
Henry Barnes MD LLD JP Honorary Secretary and Treasurer, Cumberland Branch, British Red Cross Society
James Sidney Barnes, Acting Principal Clerk, Secretary's Department, Admiralty
James Ronnie Barnett, Messrs. G. L. Watson & Company, Glasgow
Alfred Barrow, Mayor of Barrow-in-Furness; Chairman of the Local Tribunal
Capt. Edmund Burton Bartlett, Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company, Ltd.
Frederick William Bartlett, Principal Clerk, Pay Office
Commander Frederick Mortimer Barwick, Royal Navy, Portmaster and Marine Superintendent, Great Central Railway
Lt.-Col. William Fortescue Basset, Ministry of National Service
Capt. Ernest William Bastard, British Steam Shipping Company
Muriel Bather, Vice-President and Commandant, Cyngfield Auxiliary Hospital, Shrewsbury
James Allan Battarsby, Clerk to the Guardians, Nottingham; Honorary Secretary of the Local Representative Committee, and Secretary of the Local War Pensions Committee
Edith, Lady Baxter, Honorary Representative of the Ministry of Pensions, Central Scotland
Peter McLeod Baxter, Engineering Partner, Messrs. McKie & Baxter, Govan
Willoughby Lake Baylay, Manager, Birmingham Small Arms Company, Ltd., Birmingham
Ernest Edward Boyle Beamer, Superintendent of Registry, Home Office
Joseph James Beard, Acting Chief Accountant in the War Office
George Howard Beaton, Managing Director, Messrs. G. Beaton & Son, London
Clara Constance Beausire, Vice-President, Birkenhead Division, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Alfred Bednell, Secretary, Coventry Munitions Board of Management
Susan Heard Beevor, Donor and Commandant, Hoveton Hall Auxiliary Hospital, Wrexham, Norfolk
Hubert Dowson Bell, Head of the Wheat Section of the Commercial Services Branch, Ministry of Shipping
William Thomas Bell, Messrs. Robey & Company, Lincoln
Geoffrey Thomas Bennett FRS Fellow and Mathematical Lecturer, Emmanuel College, Cambridge; Scientific Assistant, Compass Department, Admiralty. Algernon Edward Berriman, Chief Engineer, Daimler Company, Ltd.
William Lewis Berrow ISO Registrar, Foreign Office
Alys Mary Bertie-Perkins, Secretary and Organizer, Swansea District, British Red Cross Society
Francis George Lawder Bertram, Secretarial Officer, Ministry of Munitions
Rosamond Bertram-Corbet, Lady Superintendent, Grosvenor Gardens Y.M.C.A. Hut
Henry Bucknall Betterton, Liaison Officer between the War Trade Intelligence Department and the Admiralty, War Office and Ministry of Munitions
Herbert Bing, Managing Director, Banbury National Filling Factory, Ministry of Munitions
Oswell Barritt Binns, Section Director, Gun Ammunition
Manufacture, Ministry of Munitions
John Bissett, Secretary, Manchester Munitions Cooperative Board of Management
Lt. David Blair, Royal Naval Reserve
Frank Blake, Partner, Messrs. W. E. Blake, Explosives Loading Co., London
Constance Caldwell Bloomfield, Lady Superintendent, Empire Union Club for Soldiers and Sailors
Clara Blount, Commandant, Stildon House Auxiliary Hospital, East Grinstead, Sussex
James Cairns Bogle JP Provost of Falkirk; Chairman of Local Tribunal
Henry Patrick Bolaud, Secretarial Officer, Ministry of Munitions
William Bonney, Naval Store Officer, H.M. Dockyard, Portsmouth
Harry Booth, Principal Clerk, Harbour Department, Board of Trade
John Oliver Borley, Superintendent Naturalist Inspector in Fisheries Division of the Board of Agriculture
Percy Dunville Botterell, Assistant Commercial Attache to His Britannic Majesty's Legation, Holland
William Cecil Bottomley, Principal Clerk, Colonial Office
John Bourdeaux, Submarine Superintendent, General Post Office
Sarah Fanny, Llady Bowater, Organiser of Red Cross Work, Birmingham
Frederick Gatus Bowers, Section Director, Finance Department, Ministry of Munitions
Thomas Anderson Bowman, Chief Engineer, Prince Line, Ltd.
William Turnbull Bowman, Assistant Director, Central Stores Department, Ministry of Munitions
Harry Robert Boyd, Late Assistant Private Secretary, Home Office
Sydney Edward Boyland, Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
Hugh Bramwell, Member of Colliery Recruiting Court, South Wales; Member of Advisory Board to Controller of Coal Mines
David Alexander Bremner, Late Head of Aluminium Section, Ministry of Munitions
Edgar Brierley JP Chairman, Manchester Local Tribunal
William Richard Brunskill Briscoe, Late Crown Prosecutor for Egypt
Flight Commander Frank Arthur Brock, Royal Naval Air Service
Archibald Brown, Commandant, Liverpool Special Constabulary
Jonathan Boswell Brown, Wilfred Gordon Brown, Legal Assistant, Ministry of Munitions
Jeffrey Browning ISO Assistant Secretary to the Board of Customs and Excise
Charles Matthewes Bruce, Acting Assistant Accountant-General of the Navy
Ellen Maud, Lady Bruce, Vice-President and Organizer of West Bridgford Auxiliary Hospital, Nottinghamshire
Frederick Bryant, Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
Jane Buchanan, Superintendent (Female Staff), Post Office Savings Bank Department
Joseph Andrew William Buchanan, Comptroller of Accounts, H.M. Office of Works
Alfred Virgoe Buckland, Deputy-Chief Valuer and CoompensaUon Officer, Directorate of Lands, Ministry of Munitions
Walter Henry Bulpitt, Managing Director of Messrs. Bulpitt, Ltd., Birmingham
Maj. Frederick Burch, Home Forces Staff
Kenneth Paul Burgess, Deputy Head of the Technical Services Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Hubert Francis Daubeny Burke, Section Director, Central Stores Department, Ministry of Munitions
May Burke, Commandant, Urmston and Fairfield Auxiliary Hospitals, Eastbourne
The Hon. Ethel Louise Burn, Commandant and Matron, Stoodley Knowle Auxiliary Hospital, Torquay
Ethel Burnett, Vice-President, Kincardineshire, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Ethel Margaret Burnside, Assistant County Director, Hertfordshire, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
William Parker Burton JP Vice-Chairman, Flour Mills Control Committee
Margery Bush, Bishop's Knoll Auxiliary Hospital, Bristol
Squadron-Commander Henry Richard Busteed, Royal Naval Air Service
Arthur Francis Butler, Section Director of Labour Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
William John Cable, Secretary of the Central Council of United Alien Relief Societies
Elizabeth Mary Cadbury
Lily Eliza Frances, Lady Caillard, Donor, Wingfield Auxiliary Hospital, Trowbridge, Wiltshire
Percy Pyne Caldecott-Smith Chief Surveyor, Director of Works Department, Admiralty
Mary Louisa Caldwell, Divisional Secretary and Deputy County Director, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem; Lady Superintendent of Minley Auxiliary Hospital, Hampshire
Philip Cambray, Private Secretary to the Minister of National Service
Joan Jessie Cameron, Organiser of Scottish Work, Munition Workers Welfare Committee, Y.W.C.A.
Alexander Campbell, Managing Director, Hunslet Engine Company, Ltd., Leeds
Florence Ishbel Campbell, Organising Secretary, Munition Workers' Welfare Committee, Y.W.C.A.
Gordon Charles Henry Campbell, Section Director of Labour RegulationDepartment, Ministry of Munitions
Athol John Capron, Managing Director, Messrs. Davey Bros., Sheffield
Mary Gertrude Carden, Honorary Secretary, Women's Patrol Service, National Union of Women Workers[12]
Frederick Carl, Secretary, National Egg Collection Committee
Walter Carlile DL JP Organising Officer, Buckinghamshire Special Constabulary
William Allan Carter JP Town Councillor of Edinburgh; Member n of Local Tribunal
Edward Henry Carter, His Majesty's Inspector of Schools
Maud Cator, Donor and Commandant, Woodbastwick Hall Auxiliary Hospital, Norwich
Squadron Commander Robert Arthur Chalmers, Royal Naval Air Service
John Alfred Cuthbert Champion, Civil Assistant to Controller, Admiralty
Maj. Samuel Stewart Champion JP Area Headquarters Recruiting Officer, Birmingham
Edward David Chetham-Strode, Legal Assistant, Ministry of Munitions
Dehra Chichester, Vice-President of St. John's Voluntary Aid Detachments for Belfast
Henry Churchill, Commercial Department, Foreign Office
Maj. William Henry Dennis Clark, Munitions Inventions Department
Geoffrey Rothe Clarke, Late Statistical Officer, Inspection Department, Ministry of Munitions
James Alexander Clarke, Chairman of the Local Tribunal of the County of Ayr
John Courtenay Clarke, Acting Assistant Director of Contracts, Admiralty
Col. Henry Clay, Deputy Director of Recruiting, Eastern Command
Robert Clay JP Clerk to the Guardians, Shoreditch
Harris Peugeot Cleaver, Clerk to the Guardians, West Derby
Andrew Cochrane, Managing Director, Messrs. Cochrane & Sons, Ltd., Selby
George Bertram Cockburn, Inspector of Aeroplanes, Aeronautical Inspection Directorate
William Coggan, Technical Adviser (Hides & Skins) to the War Office
William George Cole, Chief Constructor, H.M. Dockyard, Sheerness
Richard James Coles, Assistant Director of Finance, Ministry of Pensions
Lt.-Commander John Alsager Collett, Royal Navy
Capt. Reginald Blayney Colmore, Royal Navy
Capt. Superintendent of the Training Ship Exmouth
Arthur Douglas Constable, Superintending Electrical Engineers Department, Admiralty
Elizabeth Cooper, Honorary Secretary and Treasurer of the Milford Haven and South Wales Minesweepers Comforts Supply Association
Ernest Napier Cooper, Superintending Aliens Officer
Harry Stowe Coppock, Manager, Messrs. Sir W. G. Armstrong, Whitworth & Company, Ltd., Elswick
Mary Caroline Coulcher, Vice-President and Lady District Superintendent, St. John Ambulance Brigade; Commandant, Broadwater Auxiliary Hospital, Suffolk
Fulwar Cecil Ashton Coventry, Section Director, Inland Transport Department, Ministry of Munitions
Jane Cowen, Bernard Henry Cox, Senior Clerk, Exchequer and Audit Department
Oswald Cox, Inspector of Gun Ammunition (Technical), Ministry of Munitions
William Brownfield Craig, Assistant County Director, Totnes Division, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
John McGregor Cramond, Assistant Divisional Officer for Scotland Division, Employment Exchanges
Florentia Maria Crawshay, Vice-President and Commandant, St. Anne's Hall Auxiliary Hospital, Caversham, Berkshire
Laura Alexander Bell Cree, Convener of Headquarters Organising Clothing Committee and Stores and Despatch Committee of the Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Ernest Samuel Croft, Acting Assistant Accountant-General of the Navy
Claud Crompton, Inspector, Small Arms Ammunition, Ministry of Munitions
Edward Cropper, Architect, First Class, H.M. Office of Works
Marjorie Crosbie-Hill, Organiser of Canteens and Clubs, Munition Workers Welfare Committee, Y.W.C.A.
Josiah Crosby, His Britannic Majesty's Consul, Senaggora
Richard Basil Cross, Private Secretary, Local Government Board
Clifford William Croysdill, Superintendent of Royal Victoria Yard, Deptford
Herbert Edmond Cuff MD FRCS Principal Medical Officer to the Metropolitan Asylums Board
James William Henry Culling, Assistant Director of Victualling, Admiralty
Herbert Ashley Cunard Cummins, Charg d'Affaires at His Britannic Majesty's Legation in Mexico
Paymaster-in-Chief Henry Ashley Travel's Cummins, Royal Navy
William Cunliffe JP Chairman, Rochdale Local Tribunal
Capt. Frederick Joseph Cunnington, Chief Staff Officer to County Director, and Chief Transport Officer, Middlesex, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Kathleen Alice Cuthbert, Vice-President, British Red Cross Society, Northumberland
Olive Cuthbertson FRS Contraband Department, Foreign Office
Capt. William John Dagnall, Commodore Capt., Royal Mail Steam Packet Co.
Percy Gough Dallinger, Assistant Director, Supplies Division, Food Production Department
Robert Washington Dana, Secretary of the Institution of Naval Architects
James Stewart Davidson, Honorary Secretary, County of Aberdeen War Work Association
Commander Andrew William Davies, Royal Navy, Chief Naval Censor, Press Bureau
Lt.-Col. William Northcote Davis VD JP Chief Officer, Slough Division, Buckinghamshire Special Constabulary
Lt. Albert Edward Dawson RNVR Naval Intelligence Division, Admiralty
Margaret Darner Dawson, Commandant of Women's Police Service
Hervey Angus de Montmorency, Secretary to the Tonnage Priority Committee; Personal Assistant to the Director of Ship Requisitioning
Frederick Walter Dendy DCL Vice-Chairman, Northumberland Appeal Tribunal (Newcastle Panel)
Mark Thomas Denne, Section Director, Small Arms and Machine Guns Department, Ministry of Munitions
Commander Alexander Guthrie Denniston RNVR Naval Intelligence Division, Admiralty
Muriel Evelyn De Rougemont, Commandant, Coombe Lodge Auxiliary Hospital, Warley, Essex
Henry Charles Dickens, Commissioner under Military Service (Civil Liabilities) Committee
Thomas Cantrel Dillon MD His Majesty's Consul, Porto Alegre, Brazil
George Morton Discombe, Acting Assistant Director of Stores, Admiralty
Gertrude Caroline Dixon DSc Secretary, Wheat Executive, Ministry of Food
William Vibart Dixon, Deputy Clerk, Yorkshire West Riding County Council; Clerk to Yorkshire West Riding (Eastern Central) Appeal Tribunal
James Downs JP Commander, Hull Special Constabulary
Margaret Dudgeon, Vice-President and Acting President, Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Mildred Mabel Gordon Duff, President, Banffshire, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
George Chester Duggian, Military Sea Transport Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Leland Lewis Duncan MVO Chief Examiner and Acting Assistant Principal, War Office
Malcolm James Rowley Dunstan, Food Production Commissioner for Kent and Surrey; Principal of the South Eastern Agricultural College, Wye
Percy Durant, Manager, Paris Office of Ministry of Munitions
Sir Arthur Isaac Durant MVO Controller of Supplies, H.M. Office of Works
William Moore Dyball, District Superintendent, Brighton, London, Brighton and South Coast Railway
Edward Jerome Dyer MBE Honorary General Secretary of the Vegetable Products Committee for Naval Supply
Stephen Eastern JP Chairman, Newcastle Local Tribunal
John Edmond, Chairman of Stirling Local Tribunal
Lt. Commander Leslie Wynn Edmunds RNVR
David John William Edwardes
Charles James Edwards, Finance Branch Ministry of Shipping
George Henry Edwards, Private Secretary to the Commissioner of Metropolitan Police
James Eggar, Principal Clerk, H.M. Office of Works
Edwin Charles Eldred, Chief of the Staff of the War Trade Department
Capt. Frederick Barnard Elliot
Freight Manager, Royal Commission on Wheat Supplies
John Henry Ellis, Late Town Clerk of Plymouth and Clerk to the Plymouth Local Tribunal
Thomas Elvy Elvy, Engineering Assistant to Director of Dockyards and Repairs, Admiralty
John Emberton JP Chairman, Cheshire War Agricultural Executive Committee
Lt. Corris William Evans, Private Secretary to the Director of Transports and Shipping
Maj. Herbert Evans, Principal Clerk, Ministry of Pensions
Thomas Henry Rovston Evans JP Chairman of Fulham Local Tribunal
Basil Preston Everett, Head of Drawing Office, Air Board, Technical Department
William Herbert Lee Ewart, Telegram Department Foreign Office
Robert Crosbie Farmer DSc PhD Research Department, Woolwich
Herbert Ernest Fass, Senior Examiner, Board of Education
Frederick J. Fedarb, Secretary in Charge, Y.M.C.A., Salisbury Plain
Dora Fielden, Commandant of Auxiliary Hospital, Kineton, Warwickehire
Henry Foreman, Mayor of Hammersmith
Lady Mary Forster, Dowager Duchess of Hamilton, Donor and Commandant, Easton Hall Auxiliary Hospital, Wickham Market, Suffolk
Cecil Lewis Fortescue, Professor of Physics, Royal Navy College, Greenwich
Harold Augustus Fortingiton, Raw Materials Branch of Requirements and Statistics Department, Ministry of Munitions
James Foster, Chief Engineer, W. and C. T. Jones Steamship Company, Ltd.
Joseph Francis JP Mayor of Southend-on-Sea; Chairman, of Local Tribunal
Leonard Benjamin Franklin, Robert Francis Franklin, Secretary to the Admiral Superintendent, H.M. Dockyard, Devonport
Lt. Thomas Frazer, Technical Assistant in Statistics Department, Ministry of National Service
Robert Freeman, Technical Assistant, Surveyor-General of Supplies Department, War Office
The Hon. Essex Eleonor Ffrench, Honorary Secretary, Almeric Paget Military Massage Corps
Henry Leon French, General Secretary, Food Production Department
Reginald Thomas George French, Munitions Inventions Department
E. J. Allan Frost, Secretary in Charge, Aldershot Division, Y.M.C.A.
Mark Edwin Pesoott Frost ISO Secretary to the Admiral Superintendent, H.M. Dockyard, Portsmouth
David Bowie Fulton, Section Director, Central Stores Department, Ministry of Munitions
William Raledsrh Kerr Gandell, Divisional Director in the Department of Commercial Intelligence, Board of Trade
Lt.-Commander Eric Worsley Gandy RNVR
Annie Elizabeth Gardner, Senior Organising Officer for Women's Work, London and South-Eastern Division, Employment Exchanges
Edward Theodore Gardom, Clerk to the Gloucestershire County Council; Clerk to the Gloucestershire Appeal Tribunal
Lt. John William Frederick Garvey RNVR
George Gentry, Capt. James German, Ministry of National Service
William Doig Gibb, Consulting Gas Engineer to Explosives Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Joseph Hamilton Gibson, Mamagier of Engineering Department, Messrs. Cammell, Laird & Company, Ltd.; Member of Committee of tihe Board of Inventions and Research, Admiralty
John Watson Gibson, Late in charge of Production of Shells, Guns and Small Arms Ammunition in U.S.A., Ministry of Munitions
William John Gick, Naval Store Officer, Grand Fleet
Archibald Gilchrist JP Engineering Managing Director, Messrs. Barclay, Curie & Company Limited, Glasgow
John Gledhill, Naval Ordnance Store Officer, Crombie
William James Glenny, Chief Staff Officer, Commercial Intelligence Department, Board of Trade
James Thomas Goalen, Bailie of the Burgh of Leith
Lionel Frederic Goldsmid, Finance Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Edward Gomersall, Superintending Engineer, General Post Office
Gertrude Esperance Goodsir, Administrator and Donor, Wallacefield Auxiliary Hospital, Coombe Lane, South Croydon, Surrey
Col. Henry Erskine Gordon, Ex-Convener of Renfrewshire; Member of the Local Tribunal
William James Gordon, Engine Designer and Indoor Manager, Messrs. Tickers, Ltd., Barrow
Thomas Gowans, Senior Chief Engineer, Pacific Steam Navigation Company
Warden Gowing, Clerk, Munitions Tribunal, London
Mary Louise, Marchioness of Graham, Vice-President, Plomesgate Division, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem; Donor, Easton Hall, Auxiliary Hospital, Suffolk.
Allan Graham, Commercial Adviser to His Majesty's Legation at Copenhagen
Arthur John Wood Graham, Inspector of Munitions Areas, Newcastle
Capt. John Irvine Graham, Royal Navy, Inspector General of Customs Waterguard
Selwyn Seafield Grant, Superintending Engineer, Ministry of Munitions, No. 7 Area (Metropolis and S.E. England)
Lt. William Grant RNVR Fishery Capt., Grimsby
William Grant, Chief Engineer, Anchor Line
Maj. John Grapes, Senior Assistant to Col. in Charge of Records, Army Service Corps
Robert Gray
Edward William Green, Messrs. Green and Silley, Weir
Mary Anne Green, Commandant, Wardown Auxiliary Hospital, Bedfordshire
Lt. Donald McNeill Greig, Supply Officer in Aeroplane Supply Branch, Air Board
The Hon. Mabel Elizabeth Georgiana Greville, Vice-President, Chelmsford Division, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem; Chairman of Red Cross Depot, Essex
Sarah Gilbert Griffiths, Commandant and in Charge of Transport, Bristol, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem.
Richard Henry Grimbly MRCS Assistant County Director, Ashburton Division, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem; Deputy Commissioner of St. John, Devonshire
Wilfrid Grimshaw, Section Director, Contracts Department, Ministry of Munitions
Maj. Harold Grinsted, Chief Engineer, Royal Aircraft Factory
William Edward Gundill
Godfrey Digby Napier Haggard, Charg d'Affaires at His Britannic Majesty's Legation in Bolivia
William Thomas Hanman, Assistant Director, Factory Construction, Ministry of Munitions
Jane Ewing Hannay
Alfred John Harding, First Class Clerk, Colonial Office
Samuel Hare JP Member of Colliery Recruiting Court, South Durham
John Allen Harker DSc FRS Munitions Inventions Department
Ernest Alfred Harris, Collector, Long Room, Custom House
Emily Margaret Harrison
Richard Frederick Hartley, Controller of Small Arms Ammunition Factory, Woolwich Arsenal
Vernon Hartshorn JP South Wales Miners Federation; Member of Coal Mining Organization Committee; Member of Advisory Board to Controller of Coal Mines; Member of Colliery Recruiting Court, South Wales
Theodore Edward Hart-Smith, Section Director, Department of Area Organization, Ministry of Munitions
Ada Sophia Lucy Hatfield, Lady Secretary at Headquarters, Y.M.C.A.
Cyril George Hatherley, Inspector of Munitions Areas, Glasgow
Maj. Charles Hebert, Design Department, Ministry of Munitions
Commander Philip Herbert RNVR
Charles Heron-Watson, Commissioner for Sutherlandshire Boy Scouts
Charles James Higginson, Secretary of the Restriction of Enemy Supplies Department
George Edward Hilleary, Town Clerk of West Ham
Percy John Hinks, Controller of Filling Factories, Woolwich Arsenal
Albert Ernest Hoare JP Honorary Secretary and Treasurer of Suffolk Branch, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Lt. John Hodgens RNVR
Charles Courtenay Hodgson, Clerk to the Cumberland County Council; Clerk to the Cumberland and Westmorland Appeal Tribunal
John Alexander Hodgson, Late Chief Engineer, H.M. Dockyard, Sheerness
The Hon. Elizabeth Odeyne Hodgson, Secretary and Commandant of Clopton War Hospital, Town Hall, Stratford, Warwickshire
Capt. Norman Edward Holden, Late Deputy Director-General, Mechanical Warfare, Ministry of Munitions
Julia Holland, Donor and Commandant of Auxiliary Hospital, Brand Lodge, Colwall, Malvern
Alfred Ewart Holly, Manager of H.M. Factory, Oldbury, Ministry of Munitions
Constance Holmes, Lady Inspector, Army Pay Department
Commander Gerard-Hobert Addison Holmes RNVR
William Holmes, Accountant in the War Office
Frederic Home, Food Production Commissioner for Devon, Cornwall and Somerset
Frederick James Howard, Section Director, Finance Department, Ministry of Munitions
Godfrey Valentine Howell, Head of the Shipping Intelligence Section, Ministry of Snipping
Arthur Hughes, of the Firm of Messrs. Hughes and Son, Ltd., Opticians
Aubrey Patrick Hughes-Gibb, Private Secretary to the Food Controller
Gilbert Humphreys, Deputy Controller, Gun Ammunition Manufacture, Ministry of Munitions
John Hunt, Town Clerk of Westminster, Clerk to the Westminster Local Tribunal
Joseph Hunt ISO Deputy Civil Assistant, Woolwich Arsenal
Thomas Charles Hunter, Superintending Civil Engineer, Director of Works Department, Admiralty
Alan Hutchings, Chief Personal Assistant to the DirectorGeneral of Voluntary Organisations
Arthur Hutchinson, Fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge; University Demonstrator of Mineralogy
Emily Fenton Arrnitage Hutton, Commandant, Brookdale Auxiliary Hospital, Alderley Edge, Cheshire
William George Hynard, Head of the Collier Section, Ministry of Shipping
Louis Infeld, War Trade Statistical Department
William Edward Ireland, Late Chief Engineer, Metropolitan Munition Committee
Lt. Commander Thomas Cutlhbert Irwin RNVR
Harold Benjamin Jacks, Late Head of High Speed Steel Section, Raw Materials Branch, Ministry of Munitions
John Jackson, Trades Commissioner of the National Service Department, and Technical Adviser to the Reserved Occupations Committee
Laura Jackson, Vice-President, Solihull Division, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem; Donor, Norton Cottage and Springfield Auxiliary Hospitals, Warwickshire
George Charles James, Principal Clerk and Rating Surveyor to the Corporation of London; Clerk to the City of London Tribunal
Henry Charles Jefferies, Late Secretary to Advisory Committee, Controlled Establishments Branch, Ministry of Munitions
William Douglas Johnston, Principal Technical Officer, Fish Supplies Branch, Ministry of Food
Arthur Jones, Superintendent, Remount Depot, Worcester
Arthur Dansey Jones, Locomotive Running Superintendent, South-Eastern and Chatham Railway
Patrick Nicholas Hill Jones, Inspector of Gun Ammunition (Supervisory) London, Metropolitan Area, Ministry of Munitions
Samuel Nathan Jones, Chairman, Monmouthshire War Agricultural Executive Committee
Lt. Theodore Warren Jones RNR[12]
John Francis Jones, Adviser to Contraband Department on Wool Questions
Andrew Cassels Kay, Assistant Charity Commissioner
Sydney Herbert Kaye, Secretary of the Plate Refrigerated Tonnage Committee
Rupert Hales Headlam Keenlyside, Section Director of Labour Regulation Department, Ministry of Munitions
Alfred Evans Kelly, Chief Engineer, Tatem Steam Navigation Company
Elizabeth Hariott Kelly MBE War Pensions Committee and Portsmouth Local Charities, Portsmouth
The Reverend John Kelman DD Y.M.C.A. Worker
Commander Hubert Wynn Kenrick RD Royal Naval Reserve Shipping Intelligence Officer, London
Lady Anne Kerr, County Director and Vice-President for Midlothian, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Samuel Kidner, Member of the President of the Board of Agriculture's Food Production Department Advisory Committee
Arthur Ernest Kimpton, Secretary to the Admiral Superintendent, H.M. Dockyard, Chatham
Mary Liddon King, Commandant and Vice President, Standish Auxiliary Hospital, Stonehouser Gloucestershire
The Hon. Emily Kinnaird, Director of Appeal, Munition Workers' Welfare Committee, Y.W.C.A.
Arthur Ernest Kirkus, Statistical Department, Admiralty
William Dennett Kirkwood, Superintending Engineer, Ministry of Munitions, No. 9 Area (W. Scotland)
Matthew Kissane, Assistant Director of Materials and Priority, Controller's Department, Admiralty
Christopher Newman Knight, Section Director, Contracts Branch, Air Board
Constance Mary, Lady Knowles, Vice-President of Camberley Division, British Red Cross and Order of St. John; Commandant of Camberley Auxiliary Hospital, Surrey
Edwin Max Konstam, Assistant Director, Local Organisation Division, Food Production Department
Herman Landau, Chairman of the Jewish Refugees Committee
Evelyn Louisa Lascelles, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Grove House, Harrogate
George Philip Langton, Section Director of Labour Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Clement Martin le Breton KC Commissioner under Military Service (Civil Liabilities) Committee
James Crawford Ledlie, Chief Clerk, and Deputy Clerk of the Council, Privy Council Office
John William Lee, Commandant and Organiser of Transport in Lincolnshire, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Alice Gwynllyan Lee-Williams, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Gloucester
Henry Aufrere Leggett, First Class Clerk, Local Government Board
Lady Ada Edwina Stewart Lewin, Acting Commandant, Ascot Auxiliary Military Hospital, Berkshire
Herbert David William Lewis, Deputy Commissioner for the Order of St. John of Jerusalem in South Wales
Ruth Lewis, Lady Superintendent, Earl Street Y.M.C.A.
Alan Wadsworth Lidderdale, Contraband Department, Foreign Office
Tinsley Lindley LLD Chief Officer, Nottingham Special Constabulary
James Brown Lindsay, Cashier. H.M. Dockyard, Chatham
Staff Paymaster James Scott Little, Royal Naval Reserve
Capt. Arthur Athelwold Lloyd DSO Secretary, Sussex Territorial Force Association
George Richard Boycott Loch, Section Director, Contracts Department, Ministry of Munitions
John Lomax DL JP Secretary, Merioneth and Montgomery Territorial Force Association
William Low, Acting Convener of Fifeshire; Member of Appeal Tribunal
Thomas Martin Lowry DSc FRS Technical Adviser on Amatol, Ministry of Munitions
Mildred Lowther, Lady Superintendent, Army Pay, Department
Maj. Edward James Lugard DSO Naval Intelligence Division
Charles Lupton, Ex-Lord Mayor of Leeds
Capt. Robert J. MacAlpine, Member of British Military Equipments Section in Russia, Ministry of Munitions
Thomas Symington Macaulay, Provost of the Burgh of Dumfries; Chairman of Local Tribunal
George William MacDonald, Chief Chemist to Messrs. Curtis and Harvey, Ltd.
James Macdonald, Chief Engineer, Cunard Steamship Co., Ltd.
Sheena Macdonald, Secretary, St. Marylebone Division, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Hugh Macfarlane, Manager, Singer Manufacturing Company, Limited, Glasgow
Peter Macfarlane JP Provost of Port Glasgow
Finlay Matheson Mackenzie JP
John Mackintosh, Section Director, Trench Warfare Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
William MacLennan JP Chairman of Local Tribunal, Kirkwall
Charles Henry MacLintock, Section Director, Finance Department Ministry of Munitions
Henry William Macrosty, Assistant Director of the Census of Production, Board of Trade
Capt. Edmund Distin Maddick FRCS
Mary Sybil Mainwaring, Part Donor and Commandant, Trimpley Hall Auxiliary Hospital, Ellesmere, Shropshire
Jessy Mair, Head of Bacon Distribution Section, Ministry of Food
Albany Featherstonehaugh Major, Principal Clerk in the War Office
Frederick Henry Dumas Man, Senior Partner of Messrs. E. D. and F. Man, Mincing Lane
Arthur Woodroffe Manton, Late in Charge of Production of Lewis Guns, Copper Driving Bands, Brass Rods, etc., in U.S.A., Ministry of Munitions
Charles William Maplesden, Assistant Director of Barrack Construction, War Office
Winifred Marsden, Commandant, Colliton Auxiliary Hospital, Dorchester
Ernest William Marsh, General Manager of Woolcombers, Ltd.; Chairman of the Woolcombers Federation
The Hon. Joan Marsham, Lady Superintendent, Queen Mary Y.M.C.A. Hostel for Officers and Y.M.C.A. Hut, Sloane Square
Charles Selwyn Martin, Assistant Director of Horticulture and Head of Food Preserving Section, Food Production Department
Hubert Stanley Martin, Chief Passport Officer, Foreign Office
Alexander Neil Mason, First Class Manager, Leeds Employment Exchange
James Matson, Chief Investigation Officer for Scotland, Ministry of Munitions
Arthur Matthews, Manager, Messrs. Sir W. G. Armstrong, Whitworth & Company, Ltd., Openshaw
Thomas Leigh Matthews, Late Section Director, Department of Area Organization, Ministry of Munitions
Percy Matthey JP Managing Director, Messrs. Johnson, Matthey and Co., Ltd., London
Capt. Leslie Blythe Maxwell, Officer Commanding Friends Ambulance Unit, France and Belgium
Richard Cowdy Maxwell LLD Inspector, Local Government Board
Katharine Edith May, Secretary, Hampstead Division, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem; Donor and Administrator, Cedar Lawn Auxiliary Hospital, Hampstead
Frances McAdam, Commandant, Greenhill Auxiliary Hospital, Sherborne
James McCaffery, Superintending Electrical Engineer's Department, Admiralty
Charles Home McCall, Section Director, Raw Materials Department, Ministry of Munitions
John McCann, Chairman of the Hull Fishing Vessel Owners Association, and Port Fishery Capt.
Robert McCann, Headquarters-Staff, Y.M.C.A.
William McClelland, Electrical Engineering Assistant to Director of Dockyards and Repairs, Admiralty
Lt.-Commander William Holdsworth McConnel RNVR
Department of the Director of Torpedoes and Mining, Admiralty
Thomas McEwen, Traffic Manager, Highland Railway
Andrew McFarlane, Acting Assistant Superintendent of Ordnance Stores
Joseph McFarlane, Chief Engineer, Donaldson Line
Howard Addison McFerran, Chief Engineer, H.M. Office of Works
James McGowan
John James McKeown, Manager, Messrs. Vickers, Limited, Barrow
Richard McLaren, of the Firm of Messrs. Babcock & Wilcox, Ltd.
Capt. Peter McLean, Anchor Line, Ltd.
Capt. Neil McNeil, Ellerman City Line
Gilbert McPherson, General Manager, Georgetown Filling Factory, Ministry of Munitions
Wilfrid Medd, Accountant-General's Department, Admiralty
Alexander James Pople Menzies, Sheriff Substitute of Caithness; Chairman of Appeal Tribunal
George Babbington Michell, His Britannic Majesty's Consul, Para.
William Millar, Head of the Greenock and Grangemouth Dockyard Company
Arnold Henry Miller, Town Clerk of Norwich; Clerk to the Local Tribunal
Frank Lawrence Miller, Assistant Chief of Section, Central Office, Employment Department, Ministry of Labour
Arthur Noel Mobbs, Assistant Director, Mechanical Cultivation Division, Food Production Department
James Moffat JP Provost of the Burgh of Forfar
Alexander Moir, Metropolitan Superintending Engineer, General Post Office
Thomas Fell Molyneux, District Superintendent (London), London and South Western Railway
Frederick William Moneypenny MVO Secretary to the Lord Mayor of Belfast
Maj. Charles Babington Smith Monfries, Finance Secretary to the Commission Internationale de Ravitaillement
David Taylor Monteith, Deputy Director of Naval Sea Transport Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Evelyn Moore, Organiser of Canteens, Hostels and Clubs, Munition Workers Welfare Committee, Y.W.C.A.
Harold Moore, Research Department, Woolwich Arsenal
Jasper Frederick More, Military Intelligence Branch, War Office
Charles Morgan, His Britannic Majesty's Consul, Rome
Henry Morris, Superintendent of Royal Clarence Yard, Gosport.
Col. John Morrison MVO VD JP Chairman of Local Tribunal, Golspie, Sutherland
George A. Morrow, Director of Aviation, Imperial Munitions Board, Canada
Owen Edward Mott PhD Head Chemist at H.M. Factory, Oldbury, Ministry of Munitions
George Frederick Mulherion, Managing Director of the Tyne Iron Shipbuilding Company, Ltd.
William Murison, County Clerk of Aberdeenshire
Howard Murray, Chairman of Explosives Committee, Imperial Munitions Board, Canada
James Murray, Chairman, Surrey War Agricultural Executive Committee
Thomas Roberts Murray, Managing Director of Messrs. Spencer & Company, Ltd., Melksham
William Nash
Ethel Nest Newall, Commandant and Organiser of Auxiliary Hospital, Dilston Hall, Corbridge; Commandant of Auxiliary Hospital, Northumberland 22
Leonard Newitt, Electrical Engineer, H.M. Dockyard, Chatham
Archibald Newlands, Engineer and Secretary, Dundee Munitions Board of Management
Florence Jane Helen, Dowager Baroness Nunburnholme, Donor, Naval Hospital, Hull
Francis George Nutt, Accountant-General's Department, Admiralty
Wing-Commander Alec Ogilvie, Royal Naval Air Service, Head of Aeroplane Design Section, Air Board Technical Department
James George O'Keefe, War Office and Ministry of Munitions Financial Representative in U.S.A
Reta Oldham, Chairman of Headmistresses Committee for Inspecting Girls from Secondary Schools for Employment at War Office
John William Lambton Oliver, Naval Store Officer, H.M. Dockyard, Devonport
Philip Milner Oliver, County Secretary, East Lancashire, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Jonathan Orchard, Deputy Chief Inspector, Customs and Excise
Frederic Stanley Osgood MVO Clerk of the Central Chancery of Orders of Knighthood
Henry Overman JP
Lt.-Commander Henry Edward Clarence Paget RNVR
Marian Palmer. District Superintendent and Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Whinney House, Gateshead
Philip Palmer, Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
Winnie Pardoe, Organiser and Commandant, St. John Hospital, Barry Island, Glamorgan
Thomas Park, First Class Manager, Shoreditch Employment Exchange
George Phillips Parker JP Mayor of Holborn; Chairman, Holborn Local Tribunal
Owen Parker JP Chairman of the Local Advisory Committee, Kettering
Ethel Mary Parker-Jervis, Commandant, Sandon Hall Auxiliary Hospital, Staffordshire
Harry Edgar Parlett, Assistant Director of Ship Repairs, Controller's Department, Admiralty
Clifford Copland Paterson, National Physical Laboratory
Lt. Thomas Paterson, Inspector, Sheffield Special Constabulary
Alexander Alan Paton, Assistant in the United States to the Trade Department, Foreign Office (Declined honour)[12]
Robert G. Patterson, Member of the President of the Board of Agriculture's Food Production Department Advisory Committee
C. L. Paus, Commercial Attach, His Britannic Majesty's Legation, Norway
Walter Payne, Section Director of Labour Regulation Department, Ministry of Munitions
Ernest Alfred John Pearce, Assistant Director of Warship Production, Controller's Department, Admiralty
Commander Claud Pearce-Serocold RNVR Naval Intelligence Division
Evelyn Pease, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Richmond, North Yorkshire
Lucy Victoria Pease, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Red Barns, North Yorkshire
Constance Dorothy Evelyn Peel, Joint Head of Women's Service Section in Food Economy Division, Ministry of Food
Alice Louisa Pendarves, Deputy President, Cornwall, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Emily Penrose, Principal of Somerville College, Oxford
William Gordon Perrin, Secretary to the Fifth Sea Lord, Admiralty
William Pettifor, Secretary to the Deputy Controller for Armament Production, Admiralty
Eng.-Commander Arthur Edward Philip RNR Senior Chief Engineer, Canadian Pacific Ocean Services
Herbert Phillips, His Britannic Majesty's Consul, Shanghai
Owen Surtees Phillpotts, Commercial Attache, His Britannic Majesty's Legation, Sweden
Edith Picton-Turbervill, Director of Appeal, Munition Workers Welfare Committee, Y.W.C.A.
Mary Louisa Piercy, Organising Secretary, Munitions Workers Welfare Committee, Y.W.C.A.
Albert John Pitcher, Architect, First Class, H.M. Office of Works
William Charles Platt, Assistant Clerk in Charge of Accounts, Home Office
Annie Constance, Lady Plumer, Lady Superintendent, Aldwych Y.M.C.A. Hut
Squadron-Commander Charles Frederick Pollock, Royal Naval Air Service
Augustus Frank Pool, First Class Surveyor of Taxes, Inland Revenue
Herbert Porter, Section Director, Finance Department, Ministry of Munitions
Charles James Procter JP Y.M.C.A. Worker in Lancashire
Walter Byron Prosser, Clerk to the Kent County Council; Clerk to the West Kent Appeal Tribunal
William John Pulford, His Britannic Majesty's Consul, Tampico
Edward Joseph Rabbit, Naval Store Officer, H.M. Dockyard, Rosyth
Francis Edward Raikes MVO Senior King's Foreign Messenger
Andrew Agnew Ralston, Chairman of Local Tribunal, Philpstoun, West Lothian
Lt.-Commander James Randall RNVR Naval Intelligence Division
Hugh Fraser Rankin, Secretary of the Butter and Cheese Advisory Committee and the Butter Import Committee, Ministry of Food
Capt. Joseph Barlow Ranson, Senior Capt., White Star Line
Constance Lilian Ratcliff, Commandant, Race Course Hospital, Cheltenham
Henry Stephenson Ratcliffe, Director of Trade Negotiations, Shipyard Labour Department, Admiralty
Philip Bealby Reckitt JP Organiser, Reckitt's Auxiliary Hospital, Hull
Frank William Reed, Director, Messrs. Craven Bros., Ltd., Stockport
William Reed, Shipyard Manager at Smith's Dock Company, Ltd.
W. Maxwell Reekie, Second Officer, Manchester Special Constabulary
James Daniel Rees, Senior Clerk, Exchequer and Audit Department
Lt. Maurice Ambrose Regan RNVR Naval Transport Officer, Hull; formerly Representative of Messrs. W. Mathwin and Son, Admiralty Coaling Agents at Hull
George Reid MD Medical Officer of Health, Staffordshire County Council
William George Riddell, Partner of Messrs. Hastie and Company, Ltd., Greenock
Mary Stephanie Ridley, Vice-President, Wincanton District Somersetshire, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Edmond John Riley, Assistant Principal and Assistant Director of Army Contracts, War Office
Walter Lockhart Rind, Principal Clerk, Ministry of Pensions
Hugh Ritchie, Prize Court Department, Foreign Office
Commander Thomas Henry Roberts-Wray RNVR Executive Officer, Royal Navy, Depot, Crystal Palace
John Robertson MD Medical Officer of Health, Birmingham
Lt.-Col. William Robertson VC Recruiting Staff Officer, Edinburgh
Edwin Robinson, Manager, Messrs. Vickers Ltd., Sheffield
Roy Lister Robinson, Superintending Forestry Inspector, Board of Agriculture
William Henry Robinson, Assistant in Financial Department, Foreign Office
Alliott Verdon Roe
Capt. Tanner Montagu Rogers, Production Officer, Aeroplane Supply Branch, Coventry District
Muriel Augusta Gillian Rogers, President of Radnor Branch, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem; Commandant of Auxiliary Hospital No. 2, Radnor
Noel Burn Rosher, Inspector of Munitions Areas, Birmingham
Hugh Henderson Ross, Finance Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Godfrey Rotter, Research Department, Woolwich
Christopher Foulis Roundell, Inspector, Local Government Board
Amy Isabel, Lady Rowley, Vice-President of Guildford Division British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem; Donor, Red Cross Annexe of Royal Surrey County Hospital.
Frederick Henry Royce, Director and Chief Engineer, Rolls-Royce Ltd.
Frank William Ruddle, Chief Engineer, White Star Line
Norah Cecil Runge, Lady Superintendent, Free Buffet for Soldiers and Sailors, Paddington Station
Frederick Vernon Russell, Superintendent of Operations, Great Eastern Railway
John Russell MB Vice-President of Burslem and Tunstall Division, and Assistant County Director for the North Staffordshire Area, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Annie Rutherford, Honorary Secretary, North Riding of Yorkshire Branch, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
George Rutherford Thomson, Provost of Arbroath; Chairman of Local Tribunal
John Ryan, Assistant Inspector of Dockyard Expense Accounts, Admiralty
Louise Victoria Samuel, War Refugees Committee
David Sandison, Provost of the Burgh of Wick
Bertram Edward Sargeaunt, Clerk of the Council and Government Secretary and Treasurer, Isle of Man
Frederick James Saunders
District Stores Superintendent, Glasgow, Ministry of Munitions
Edwin Savill, Member of the President of the Board of Agriculture's Food Production Department Advisory Committee
Francis Ernest Saville, Chief Administration Officer, Leeds Special Constabulary
Albert Edwin Sawday JP Chairman of Leicester Local Tribunal
Sidney Scott, Collector of Customs and Excise, Glasgow
Commander Thomas George Segrave, Royal Naval Reserve, Shipping Surveyor and Adviser, India Office
George Bertrand Sharpies, Engineer and Director of Messrs. C. J. Wills and Sons, Ltd.
Edward Burgess Sharpley, Town Clerk of Stoke-on-Trent; Clerk to the Local and Appeal Tribunal
Fleet-Paymaster Edward Haweis Shearme, Royal Navy, Assistant Chief Censor, Admiralty
Frank Sheppard, Lord Mayor of Bristol; Member of Bristol Local Tribunal
William Alfred Thomas Shorto, Secretary, Auxiliary Shipbuilding Department, Admiralty
Herbert John Simmonds, Secretary to the Advisory Committee to the Military Service'(Civil Liabilities) Committee
Col. Robert Henville Simonds VD DL JP Secretary, Dorset Territorial Force Association
Sophia Flora Skipwith, Commandant, Loversall Auxiliary Hospital, Doncaster
George Philip Skipworth, Assistant Commercial Attache, His Britannic Majesty's Legation, Switzerland
Alfred Smith, Managing Director, Messrs. Hattersley and Sons, Ltd., Kingsbury
Charles Smith, Principal Clerk, Pay Office
Ernest Wentworth Smith, Deputy Controller, Gauges Department, Ministry of Munitions
Frank Edward Smith Superintendent, Electrical Department, National Physical Laboratory
George Henry Cheverton Smith, Secretary and Cashier, H.M. Dockyard, Pembroke Dock
Herbert Smith JP President of the Yorkshire Miners Association and Vice-President of the Miners Federation of Great Britain
John Arthur Smith, Accountant-General's Department, Admiralty
Capt. Rowland Siddons Smith, Translator to His Britannic Majesty's Embassy, Petrograd
Thomas Blampey Smith, Manager, Coventry Ordnance Works, Ltd., Coventry
William Sydney Smith Inspector of Factories (Dangerous Trades)
Florence Mary Snowden, Organising Secretary, Voluntary Helpers, Munition Workers Canteen Committee, Y.W.C.A.
F. N. Southam, Director, 60-pounder and 4.5 H.E. Shell Production, Imperial Munitions Board, Canada
Charles Joseph Southgate Accountant-General's Department, Admiralty
Mary Gertrude Catherine Hitchcock Spencer, Central Women's Employment Bureau for the Relief of the Professional Classes
Rose Elizabeth Squire, Deputy Principal Lady Inspector of Factories
Alfred Edward Staniland JP Chairman of the Spilsby Local Emergency Committee, Lincolnshire
Frank Robert Stapley, Section Director, Contracts Branch, Air Board
Charles Stein MD Commandant and Medical Officer, Park House Auxiliary Hospital, Shipston-on-Stour, Warwickshire
Maj. Charles Hubert Stemp, Operating Superintendent, North British Railway
George Routledge Stenson, Superintending Inspector of Taxes
Richard Henry Stephenson, Manager, Messrs. Smith's Dock Company, Ltd., North and South Shields
Frederick Stevens, Town Clerk of Bradford; Clerk to the Bradford Local Tribunal
Ida Kathleen Stevens, Area Controller, Woman's Army Auxiliary Corps
Patrick William Joseph Stevens, His Majesty's Consul, Batoum
May Margaret Stevenson, Unit Administrator, Woman's Army Auxiliary Corps
William March Stevenson, Financial Expert Adviser to the Finance Section, Ministry of Blockade
Alice Margaret Stewart, President Depute, Lanarkshire, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Athole Stewart, Telegram Department, Foreign Office
James Stewart, Works Manager, The Caton Engineering Company's Torpedo Factory
William Allison Stewart, Commercial Services Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Rufus Stirk, Director, Messrs. John Stirk & Sons, Ltd., Halifax
Commander Thomas Willing Stirling, Royal Navy, Operations Division, Admiralty
Frederick William Stobart, George William Stonestreet, Inspector of Stamping, Inland Revenue
Maj. Harry Vane Stow VD Secretary of the Newspapers for the Fleet Committee, London Chamber of Commerce
Henrietta Mary Amy Strachey, Vice-President of Division and Commandant of Newlands Corner Auxiliary Hospital, Merrow Downs, Guildford, Surrey
Evelyn Olive Streatfeild, Commandant, Hammerton House Auxiliary Hospital, Sunderland
Mary Corisande Streatfeild, Donor and Administrator, Officers Hospital, 24, Park Street, Mayfair, London
Emily Mary Charlotte Strutt, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Belper, Derbyshire
George Stubbs FIC Superintending Analyst, Government Laboratory
George Edward Suter MVO Manager, Constructive Department, H.M. Dockyard, Rosyth
Percival Francis Swain, Principal Clerk, Public Trustee Office
William Henry Swain, Senior Clerk, Military Department, India Office
George Percy Tallboy, Private Secretary to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Food
Arthur Enfield Taylor, Head of Establishment Branch, Explosives Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. David Taylor, Master, Donaldson Line
George Stevenson Taylor, Deputy Inspector under the Aliens Act
John Taylor, Manager, Messrs. Mather and Platt, Ltd., Manchester
Richard Henry Taylor, Of the Firm, of Messrs. Topham, Jones and Railton, Ltd.
Capt. Thomas McComb Taylor, Royal Naval Reserve, Master, Pacific Steam Navigation Company
Capt. Louis George Tebbs, District Stores Superintendent, London, Ministry of Munitions
Alfred Edward Tedder, Superintending Aliens Officer
Ivy Gladys Tennyson, Head of Womens Establishment Branch, Ministry of Munitions
David John Thomas, Manager and Secretary, Llanelly Munitions Board of Management
Edgar William Thomas, Financial Adviser to the Public Trustee
Capt. John Thomas
Lillie Thomas, Donor and Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Dinas Powis, Glamorgan
Walter John Thomas, Managing Director, Messrs. George Driver and Son, London
Mary Thompson, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Burton-on-Trent, Staffordshire
Robert John Thompson, Head of Fertilisers Section, Food Production Department
Margaret Edith Thomson, Commandant, Divisional Auxiliary Hospital, Ampthill Road Schools, Bedford
William Thomas Thomson, Manager, Royal Naval Cordite Factory, Holton Heath
Daisy Thornely, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Devizes
William Thornton, Clerk, Munitions Tribunal, Leeds
Duncan Todd, Secretary, Reserved Occupations Committee
Joseph Henry Towsey, His Britannic Majesty's Consul, Milan
Herbert Arthur Previte Trendell MVO Chief Clerk of the Central Chancery of Orders of Knighthood
George Harry Male Trew, Acting Superintending Civil Engineer, H.M. Dockyard, Invergordon
The Hon. Stella Tufton, Lady Superintendent, Alexandra Y.M.C.A. Hostel for Officers
Capt. William Thomas Turner, Cunard Steamship Co., Ltd.
Armigill Thomas Turpin, Assistant Comptroller of Accounts and Stores, Prisor Commission
George Frederick Tweedy, Engineering Director, Messrs. Swan, Hunter and Wighain Richardson, Ltd.
Walter Clifford Tyndale
Hugh Harman Underbill, Assistant Superintendent of Charts, Hydrographic Department, Admiralty
Harry Archbutt Venables ISO Principal Clerk, Ministry of Pensions
James William Verdier, Superintendent of Staff, Census of Production, Board of Trade
Percy Venables Vernon, Section Director, Machine Tool Department, Ministry of Munitions
David Arthur Fitzgerald Vesey, Legal Draftsman, Contracts Department, Ministry of Munitions
Harry Walker, Messrs. Clark, Chapman & Company, Ltd., Gateshead-on-Tyne
Falconer Lewis Wallace, Commission Internationale de Ravitaillement, Board of Trade
William Reeve Wallace, Chief Clerk, Judicial Department, Privy Council Office
Cecil Walton JP Manager, Cardonald National Projectile Factory, Ministry of Munitions
Thomas Warburton, Director of the Bleachers Association, Ltd.
Leonard Ward, Late Superintending Engineer, Ministry of Munitions, No. 4 Area (Midlands)
Henry Brooks Warner, Prisoners of War Department, Foreign Office
Robert A. S. Waters, Manager, Messrs. Sir W. G. Armstrong, Whitworth & Company, Ltd., York
Arthur William Watson, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Establishment Branch, Whitehall Gardens, Ministry of Munitions[12]
Henry Watson, Messrs. H. Watson & Sons, Newcastle-on-Tyne
Isaac Adolphus Herbert Watson, Superintendent of Stores & Transit, H.M. Stationery Office
William Elder Watson JP Member of Appeal Tribunal, Elgin
Edgar Charles Watts, Naval Store Officer, H.M. Dockyard, Chatham
Henry Weatherill, Principal Clerk and Actuary to the National Debt Commissioners
Frederick William Herron Weaver, Ministry of Shipping
Cecil Dunstan Webb, Procurator-General's Department
Amherst Webber, Director, Passport Control Office, Paris
William Goold Weir, Partner of Messrs. David Rowan & Company, Glasgow
Thomas George Raymond Wells, War Office Meat Expert
Basil Eliot Wenham, Section Director, Raw Materials Department, Ministry of Munitions
Edmund Arthur Robert Werner, Inspector of Factories
Capt. John Andrew Chilton Wetherall, Secretary, Northampton Territorial Force Association
Charles Joseph Wharton, Deputy Director of Inspection, Munitions Areas, Sheffield
Lt.-Col. William Henry Anthony Wharton VD
Arthur Rabbitts White JP Chairman, Wiltshire War Agricultural Executive Committee
Frederick White, Secretary of the Australasian Refrigerated Tonnage Committee
Frederick Wickham, Controller, Money Order Department, General Post Office
Commander Edmund Wildy VD RNVR Drafting Commander, Royal Navy, Department, Crystal Palace
Lt. Norman Wilkinson RNVR RI
Frank Eliot Williams, Chairman of one of the Licensing Committees of the War Trade Department
Maj. Ronald Frederick Williams, Assistant Director, Shipyard Labour Department, Admiralty
Arthur Maitland Wilson DL JP Chairman of the Organising Emergency Committee, West Suffolk
Geraldine Wilson, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Stanwick Park, North Yorkshire
George Gordon Wilson, His Britannic Majesty's Consul, Callao
George Heron Wilson, Assistant Controller, Priority Department, Ministry of Munitions
Harry James Wilson, Superintending Inspector of Factories
Hubert Wilberforce Wilson, His Britannic Majesty's Consul, Guayaquil
Thomas Wilson JP Member of Lanarkshire Appeal Tribunal
Lt.-Commander Harry Egerton Wimperis RNVR
William Humphris Winny, A Knight of Grace and Deputy Commissioner of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem
James Wood, Chief Inspector, Board of Agriculture for Scotland
James Wood, Director of Shrapnel Production, Imperial Munitions Board, Canada
Joseph Woods Senior Dental Surgeon, Mirren, Switzerland
William James Uglow Woolcock, Secretary, Pharmaceutical Society; Assistant Director of Army Contracts
Frank Vigers Worthington, Deputy Chief Censor, War Office
Anthony Andrew Augustine Wotzel, Chief Staff Officer, Labour Statistics Department, Ministry of Labour
Charles Francis Wright, Superintending Inspector of Factories
Hugh Copner Wynne-Edwards, Section Director, Contracts Department, Ministry of Munitions
Aline Wythes, Vice-President, Epping Division, British Red Cress and Order of St. John of Jerusalem; Commandant of Theydon Towers Auxiliary Hospital, Epping, Essex
Sophia Bruce Yeoman, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Sleights, North Yorkshire
Frederick William Young, Naval Salvage Adviser
James Young, Senior Instructor in Science, Royal Military Academy
Robert Hellyer Young, Ministry of Shipping
Sidney Young, Managing Director of the British Argentine Meat Company
For services in connection with the War in France, Egypt and Salonika 

William Austin, Young Men's Christian Association Secretary for the 1st and 3rd Armies
Alice Chisholm, Organiser and Superintendent of the Soldiers' Club and Rest Camp, Kantara Railway Station, Egypt
Isabel Currie, Founder and Manager of the British Soldiers' Club, Havre
Richard Hare Duke, Deputy Chief Engineer, Egyptian State Railways
George Herbert Griffith, Traffic Superintendent, Egyptian State Railways
William Jessop, Manager, Young Men's Christian Association, Egypt
Charles John Magrath DLitt Superintendent, Young Men's Christian Association, France
Sydney H. Wells, Director-General of Technical Education, Egypt
British India
Constance Fraser, President, Hyderabad Ladies War Relief Association
Lt.-Col. Arthur Leslie Jacob CIE Indian Army, Political Department, Political Agent, Zhob, Baluchistan
Maj. Arthur Dennys Gilbert Ramsay CIE Indian Army, Political Department, Political Agent, Loralai, Baluchistan
Lt.-Col. Henry Batten Huddleston, Agent, Burma Railways, Honorary Aide-de-Camp to the Lieutenant-Governor of Burma, Vice-Chairman, Rangoon Port Trust
David Petrie CIE Indian Police
Godfrey Charles Denham CIE Indian Police
Cowasji Jehangir, Merchant, Bombay
Sarat Kumar Mullick MD Honorary Secretary, Bengalee Regiment Committee, Private Medical Practitioner, Calcutta
Thomas Steel Downie, Secretary, Karachi Port Trust
Arthur Alexander Carnegie, Commander of the Cable Steamer Patrick Stewart
Edward John Buck, Honorary Secretary of "Our Day" in India
Commonwealth of Australia
Elizabeth Anderson, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Percy Arnold, for services in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society in England
Doctor Edith Helen Barrett, Honorary Secretary, Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Charles Austin Bunworth Campion, for services in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society in England
Mary Elizabeth Maud Chomley, for services in connection with the Australian Branch of the British' Red Cross Society in England
Adelaide, Lady Creswell, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Vera Deakin, for services in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society in England
James Oswald Fairfax, Chairman of the New South Wales Division, Australian Branch, British Red Cross Society
Jeannie Gilruth, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Lt.-Col. Edwyn Walton Hayward, Commissioner, Australian Red Cross Society[12]
Gwyneforde, Lady James, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
A. E. Miller, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Mary Elizabeth, Lady Miller, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Gladys Owen, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
F. Mary Parker, Honorary Secretary, Southern Tasmanian Division, Australian Red Cross
Philadelphia Una Robertson, Secretary, Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Kathleen Kyffin Thomas, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Herbert Carey Tucker, Initiator of the Button Scheme
Reginald Edward Weigall MB Organiser of motor service for the reception of returned and wounded soldiers
Egypt and the Sudan
Arthur Thomas Lloyd, War Trade Department
James Francis Gordon Hopkins, Chief Inspector, Ministry of Finance
Arthur Ferguson MacCallan FRCS Director of Ophthalmic Hospitals
Albert William Hazel, Inspector of Interior
Edward Harry Grogan, Chief Inspector of Marine, Ports and Lights Administration
Lindsay Edward Bury, Inspector of Irrigation
Frank Pears Watson, Inspector of State Buildings, Department of Public Works
Harold Preece Hewins, Secretary of Sudan Economic Board
George Ehret Iles, Governor of Blue Nile Province
Clement Gaukroger Hodgson, Chief Mechanical Engineer, Sudan Railways
William Crothers Hornblower, Organiser of the Refugee Camps at Alexandria and Port Said
Norman Macnaghten, Inspector, Ministry of Interior
Dominion of New Zealand
Fanny Boyle
Heni Materoa, Lady Carroll
James John Clark, Mayor of the City of Dunedin
Lavinia Coates
David Whamond Duthie
James Henry Gunson, Mayor of the City of Auckland
Jessie Gunson
Henry Holland, Mayor of the City of Christchurch
Jane Holland
Helen Lowry
Miria Woodbine Pomare
Arthur Edgar Gravenor Rhodes
Eva Lydia Rutherford
Mary Downie Stewart
Agnes Vernon Wigram
Hilda Williams, for services in connection with the Hospitality Committee of the New Zealand War Contingent Association
Union of South Africa
Theodora Mildred Amphlett, Honorary Secretary, South African Comforts Committee in London
Norman Anstey, late Mayor of Johannesburg
Reginald Andrew Blankenberg, Assistant Secretary to the High Commissioner in London for the Union of South Africa
The Hon. Albert Browne CMG ISO Joint Honorary Secretary, Governor-General's Fund
The Hon. Phyllis Sydney Buxton, for Hospital and Convalescent work
Penelope Louise Chappe, of the Red Cross Committee, Durban
Gowan Cresswell Strange Clark CMG Assistant General Manager, South African Railways
Mary Elizabeth Davis, of the Women's Patriotic.League, Pietermaritzburg
Walter Greenacre, of the Governor-General's Fund and other Committees, Durban
Helen Lena, Lady Juta
Elizabeth Tryphena Lewis, of the Comforts Committee, Cape Town
Ellen Maria Louisa Mackeurtan, of the Women's Patriotic League, Durban
Susannah Brandt Marx, of the Comforts Committee, Johannesburg
Joseph Henry Nicolson, Mayor of Durban
John Wesley O'Hara, late Mayor of Johannesburg
John Parker, late Mayor of Cape Town
Henry William Sampson, Member of the Executive Committee, Governor-General's Fund
Sybil Annie, Lady Smartt, of the Red Cross and other War Fund Committees
Maud Elizabeth, Lady Solomon
Col. The Hon. Walter Ernest Mortimer Stanford CB CMG Chairman, Recruiting Committee, Cape Town
Maj. Edward Albert Sturman, Honorary Secretary, South African Gifts and Comforts Committee
John Taylor, Chairman, Johannesburg Local Committee of the Governor-General's Fund
Carel Johannes van Zijl, for services in connection with recruiting
Newfoundland
Adeline Elizabeth Browning, for services in connection with the reception and treatment of returned sailors and soldiers
Charles O'Neill Conroy KC Commandant of the Catholic Cadet Corps
Katharine Emerson, Treasurer of the Women's Patriotic Association
Walter Baine Grieve, Honorary Secretary of the Recruiting Committee
Eleonora Thompson MacPherson, Member of the Executive of the Women's Patriotic Association
Florence Lavinia Paterson, Member of the Committee for receiving returned soldiers
Robert George Rendell, Organiser of the Cadet Corps
Crown Colonies, Protectorates, etc.
Chaloner Grenville Alabaster, for services in connection with the Cable Censorate, Hong Kong
John Humber Allwood, for services to the Government of Jamaica and to War charities
Capt. James Leo Berne, District Commissioner, Somaliland Protectorate, for services in connection with the supply of camels for the Egyptian Expeditionary Force
Amy Isabel, Lady Bullock, for services in aid of War charities in the Bermuda Islands
Albert Ruskin Cook MD Medical Officer, Church Missionary Society Hospital, Kampala, Uganda
Lt.-Col. James Cran, Commanding the British Honduras Territorial Force
Anthony de Freitas, Chief Justice and Acting Administrator of the Island of St. Vincent
Gertrude Drayton, Secretary, King George and Queen Mary Victoria League Clubs for men of the Oversea Forces
Ada Maud, Lady Egerton; for services to War and other charities in British Guiana
Muriel Harriet Felton; for services rendered to the British Squadron on the occasion of the Naval Battle of the Falkland Islands, 8 December 1914
John Campbell Fisher, Auditor, and Head of the Food Control Office, Malta
Stanley Hewitt Fletcher, late-Consul at Chinde, and Agent there of the Nyasaland Government
John Talfourd Furley, Secretary for Native Affairs, Gold Coast Colony
The Hon. Evelyn Graham Murray, Lady Superintendent of Peel House, King George and Queen Mary's Club for the Oversea Forces
George Frederick Huggins, for services in connection with recruiting and in securing employment for discharged soldiers, Trinidad
Edward St. John Jackson, Legal Adviser, Colony of the Gambia
Williard Frank James, Mayor of Blantyre, and Chairman of the Central War Funds Committee, Nyasaland Protectorate
Robert Russell Horsley Jebb, Assistant District Commissioner, Somaliland Protectorate; for services in connection with the supply of camels for the Egyptian Expeditionary Force
Margaret Emmeline Johnston, President of the Working League, Gibraltar
Lim Boon Keng, Unofficial Member of the Legislative Council of the Straits Settlements
Harcourt Malcolm KC Speaker of the House of Assembly of the Bahamas Islands, and Chairman of the Bahamas' War Relief Committee
James Gordon McDonald, Chairman of the Rhodesia Munitions Committee
Sybil Helen Nicholson, for services on behalf of sailors and soldiers in the Straits Settlements
Edward Hugh Dyneley Nicolls, Director of Public Works, Cyprus
Joseph Armand Patron CMG for services to the Government of Gibraltar
Emily, Lady Probyn, for services to War Charities in Barbados
Cecily Radcliffe, for services to War Charities and to sick and wounded sailors and soldiers, Malta
Beatrice Letitia May Radford, Secretary and Organiser of the East African Women's Field Force Fund
Joseph Rippon, Manager of the Direct West India Cable Company, and Chairman of the Bermuda Contingents Committee
Corinna, Marchesa Scicluna; for services in providing and equipping a Military Hospital in Malta
Ernest Hamilton Sharp, Chairman of the Military Commission, Hong Kong
Hubert Ashton Laselve Simpson, elected Member of the Legislative Council, and lately Mayor of Kingston
Jamaica
Stanley Salisbury Spurling, Member of the Executive Council and of the House of Assembly of the Bermudas
Newton John Stabb, Chief Manager, Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, Hong Kong
Maj. Charles Augustus Swinbourne, Commandant of the Fiji Defence Force
William Wilson, of Kingston, Jamaica; for services in recruiting and on behalf of sick and wounded soldiers
Honorary Officer of the said Most Excellent Order
The Right Reverend Philippe Perlo, for assistance in providing priests and nuns for the work in the Carrier Corps Hospitals, in connection with the East Africa Expeditionary Force.
Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE)[edit]
Military Division[edit]
Capt. John Herbert Ashton, Superintending Officer, Army Veterinary Corps
Margaret Winifred Atkinson, Superintendent, Cookery Section, Women's Legion
Capt. Albert Raymond Auger, Q.M., Base Depot, Canadian Forestry Corps
Capt. William Edgar Aylwin, Royal Flying Corps
Capt. John Baker, Royal Army Service Corps; Confidential Clerk to Assistant Director of Transport, War Office
Lt.-Col. Harry Hyndman Balfour, RAMC; South African Hospital, Richmond Park
Capt. Douglas Barnes, Commanding No. 2 Depot Battalion, Overseas Training Brigade, Australian Imperial Forces
Lt. Harold Wilmot Barras, Royal Garrison Artillery; Assistant Inspector of Carriages, Ministry of Munitions
Maj. Alexander Barron, Royal Army Service Corps
Maj. David Ernest Bellaney, Remount Service
Lt.-Col. William Joseph Bentley, Assistant Director of Dental Services, Canadian Forces
Capt. John Augustus Blay, Q.M.-General's Department, War Office
Maj. Arthur Blennerhassett, Remount Service
Capt. Lester Browning Booty, Inspector Auditor, Messing Accounts, War Office
Capt. Ernest Bowles, South African Pay Office
Capt. Henry Cecil Boys, Formerly Assistant Inspector of Gun Ammunition (Technical), Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Frederick Henry Ewart Branson, Army Ordnance Department
Capt. Edwin Brown, Assistant Inspector of Gun Ammunition (Technical), Ministry of Munitions
Helen Grace Rae Brown, Administrator, Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps
Lt. Herbert Charles Stuart Bullock, Royal Flying Corps
Maj. Charles Duncan Miles Campbell, Royal Flying Corps
Lt.-Col. David Bishop Campbell, Forestry Technical Officer, Canadian Forestry Corps
Maj. Francis Henry Chalkley, Ordnance Officer in Charge of Salvage Depot
Capt. Charles Joseph Charlton, Staff Capt., Canadian Headquarters
Col. Sir John Maurice Clark Bt VD Midlothian Territorial Force Association, Ministry of National Service
Lt.-Col. William James Clarke, Royal Field Artillery, Assistant Inspector of Carriages, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Thomas Coates, Superintending Officer (Q.M.), General Headquarters, Home Forces
Maj. William Coley, Royal Artillery, Q.M., Depot, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Maj. Henry Cooper, Commissary of Ordnance, Woolwich
Sylvia Corner, Q.M., Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps
Lt. Gordon George Crocker, Military Intelligence Branch, War Office
Maj. Roy Victor Cutler MC Commanding Australian Engineers Training Depot
Capt. R. J. Durley, in charge of Gauges and Drawings, Canada, Ministry of Munitions
Hester Mary Edwards, Administrator, Woman's Army Auxiliary Corps
Maj. William Farraday, Reserve Mechanical Transport Depot
Capt. Alexander Fenton, in charge of Technical Warehouse, Canadian Forestry Corps
Lt.-Col. Alpin Ferguson, Deputy Assistant Director of Timber Operations, Canadian Forestry Corps
May Finlay, Superintendent, Cookery Section, Women's Legion
Capt. Harold Fortescue Flannery, Late Proof Officer, Canada, Ministry of Munitions
Lt.-Col. John James Fry, Deputy Director of Transport, Canadian Forces
Lt. William Henry Gregory Geake, Assistant at Munitions Inventions Department, Experimental Ground
Jane Margaret Francis Gibson, Superintendent, Cookery Section, Women's Legion
Lt. Richard Jones, in charge of Materials, Mechanical Transport Depot, Kempton Park
Lt. Herbert Alfred Joy, Royal Artillery, Estimating Officer, Coast Defence Armament
Maj. Wybrants Judge, Q.M., Rifle Depot, Winchester
Lt. John James Keene, Confidential Clerk, War Office
Capt. Frederick Keough, Q.M., No. 4 Reserve Brigade, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Robert John Lapham, Army Service Corps
Maj. Herbert Laurie, Remount Service
Capt. James Lawrence, Royal Army Service Corps; Chief Clerk, Supplies Branch, War Office
Maj. Clive Leese, Inspecting Officer to Mechanical Transport, Ministry of Munitions
Maj. Edwin Philip Le Mesurier, Jersey Militia; Area Commander, White City, West London
Capt. John Walter Litchfield, Assistant Inspector, Army Ordnance Depot, Woolwich
Maj. Owen Lobley, Canadian Army Pay Corps
Capt. Henry John Leicester Longden, Inspector of Army Schools
Capt. Arthur Henry Lowe, in charge of Army Ordnance Depot, Aintree
Capt. Dudley Owen Lumley, Wiltshire Regiment; Deputy Assistant Inspector of Recruiting, Southern Command
Capt. Thomas Lyons, Deputy Assistant Director of Aircraft Equipment, Air Board
Capt. William Charles McCutchan MC Adjutant, Australian Signal Training Depot
Capt. Alexander McDonald, Assistant Inspector of Guns, Ministry of Munitions
Maj. the Reverend John Howard MacDonald DD Canadian Headquarters Staff
Lt. William Henry George Maton, Royal Artillery, Ordnance Department, War Office
Lt. Thomas Matthews, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt.-Col. Henry George Mayes, Director, Canadian Army Gymnastic Staff
Lt. Frederick George Middleton, Royal Engineers, Inspector, Royal Engineer Machinery, War Office
Lt. James Edward Moberly, Assistant Engineer, Ministry of Munitions, No. 7 Area (Metropolitan)
Capt. William Morgan, Royal Engineers, Q.M., Northern Command
Lt. John William Mort
Lt. Frederick Montague Augustus Morris, Assistant to Staff Capt., War Office
Lt. James Thomas Morton Clarke, Q.M.-General's Department, War Office
Maj. George Alexander Stokes Nairn, Supervising Military Representative of No. 4 District; Assistant Inspector of Recruiting, Western Command
Maj. John Arnold Neale, Australian Imperial Force, in charge of Australian Records
Lt. Thomas Neame, Works Manager, Messrs. Stewarts & Lloyds, Ltd., Birmingham
Capt. Richard Trevor Tudor Owen, Montgomeryshire Yeomanry; Assistant Inspector of Small Arms, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Percy Frank Parker, Royal Army Ordnance Corps; in charge of Clothing Department, Leicester
Maj. Sidney Ernest Parker, Instructor, Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Robert Halstead Porters, Secretary, British Military Mission at Russian Headquarters
Capt. Frederick Charles Prime, Royal Artillery, Assistant Inspector of High Explosives, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Percy Thorndon Remington, Dental Officer, Australian Army Medical Corps
Capt. William Hoyles Rennie, Volunteer Musketry Instructor, for services in connection with the Royal Newfoundland Regiment
Lt. William Rush, in charge of Stores, No. 2 Reserve Transport Depot, Blackheath
Capt. Percy Rust, London Regiment, Artists Rifles Officers Training Corps
Maj. William John Ryan, Royal Flying Corps
Capt. Henry Sadler, Royal Army Service Corps; Riding Master, Buller Barracks, Aldershot
Maj. Thomas Lewis Lindsay Sandes, South African Hospital, Richard Park
Capt. Walter Richard Shilstone, in charge of Canadian and American Inspection Section, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Sidney James Smith, Royal Army Service Corps; Chief Clerk, Aldershot Command
Brevet Col. Stanley George Drew Smith, Assistant Inspector of Carriages, Ministry of Munitions
Lt. Charles Henry Hughes Spivey, Acting Q.M. and Superintending Clerk of Reserve Battalion, Scots Guards
Lt. Leslie Norman Waldegrave Stone, Royal Garrison Artillery; Assistant Inspector of Carriages, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Arthur Fraser Sutton, Senior Dental Officer, Australian Army Medical Corps
Capt. Walter Benjamin Thorpe, Royal Army Service Corps; Chief Superintending Clerk, Northern Command
Capt. Edwin George Thomas Tims, School of Instruction for N.C.O.s, Salisbury
Maj. Walter Henry Tofft, Australian Army Medical Corps
Maj. William Walker, Royal Army Ordnance Department
Beatrice Gascoigne Ward, Deputy Commandant, Motor Section, Women's Legion
Capt. William George West, Gun Contracts, Contracts Department, Ministry of Munitions
Lt. Percy Claydon Whitteridge, Royal Army Ordnance Corps
Maj. Richard Charles Williamson, Recruiting Officer, Greenock Sub-Area
Capt. George Frederick William Willicot MC Staff Officer, Royal Engineers
Lt. Cecil Herbert Stanley Willis, Artists Rifles Officers Training Corps
Maj. Godfrey Harold Alfred Wilson, General Staff, War Office
For services in connection with the War in France, Egypt and Salonika 

Lt. Andrew Buchan, Royal Engineers
Gladys Mary Collins, Deputy Administrator, Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps
Capt. Francis Robertson Gladstone Duckworth, Secretary, Claims Commission, British Salonika Force
Lt. George Ingle Finch, Royal Army Ordnance Corps; Base Ordnance Depot, Salonika
Mary Sophia Frood, Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps, Area Controller, Abbeville
Lilias Ida Gill, Unit Administrator, Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps
Gladys Alicia Jones, Assistant Administrator, Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps
Margaret Kilroy Kenyon, Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps, Area Controller, Calais
Maj. William F. Lench, lately Officer in charge of Egyptian Expeditionary Force Canteens
Alice Low, Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps, Area Controller, Boulogne
Frances Mary Parker, Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps, Area Controller, Havre
Edith Mary Pridden, Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps, Area Controller, taples
Civil Division[edit]
Ethel May Abram, Commandant, St. Luke's Auxiliary Hospital, Reading
Margaret Acland Hood, Organiser of Recreation Clubs, Munition Workers Welfare Committee, Y.W.C.A.
Maud Florence Addington, Superintendent, Lady Clerical Staff, Officers Casualty Branch, War Office
William James Addiscott, Assistant Collector of Fishery Statistics at Plymouth
Florence Bessie Affleck, Assistant Organiser and Administrator, High Wycombe Auxiliary Hospital
Andrew Aikman, Secretary and Engineering Manager, South-Eastern Midlands Munitions Board of Management
William Aitkenhead, Shop Manager, Messrs. G. & J. Weir, Ltd.
Ernest Charles Aldridge, Travelling Inspector, Central Stores Department, Ministry of Munitions
Samuel Kendrick Aldridge, Assistant, Director of Finance, Ministry of Food
Stroma Alexander-Sinclair
Charles Hugh Alison, Acting Paymaster, Army Pay Department
George Macdonald Allan, Naval Sea Transport Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Ida Allan, Commandant, Hornbrook Auxiliary Hospital, Chislehurst
Thomas Easton Allan, Messrs. Robey & Company, Ltd.
Thomas Cuthbert Allchin, E.G. Powder Company, Ltd.
William Barnes Alloock, Superintendent, Perivale National Filling Factory, Ministry of Munitions
Alan Bruce Allen, Inspector of Furs and Skins, War Office
Frank Allen, Chief Special Constable, Doncaster
Alfred Amos JP Chairman of the Kent Farmers Club
Capt. Henry Leonard Herbert Andrews, Ministry of National Service
Malcolm Percival Applebey, Acids Supply Branch of Explosives Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Lt. Alfred Henry Arnold, Secretary to Mediterranean Commission, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Florence Evelyn Arnott, Commandant in Charge, St. Michael's Auxiliary Hospital, Brampton, Cumberland
Olive Inana Arthur, Vice-Convenor and General Manager, Red Cross Comforts Depot, Ayr
Lt. Robert William Ascroft, Head of Spraying Organisation, Food Production Department
Harry Hales Ashbridge, Works Manager, Churchill Machine Tool Company Limited, Manchester
Ernest Gilman Ashley, Commercial Steel Section, Iron and Steel Department, Ministry of Munitions
Wilfred Adam Ashworth, Technical Assistant, Machine Tool Department, Ministry of Munitions
Carleton Richard Bucky Atkinson, Assistant in Levant Consular Service
Sydney Watson Attwell, Assistant, National Phvsical Laboratory
Frances Victoria Aur, Secretary, Convalescent Homes for Officers Committee, British Red Cross Society
Stanley Back, Royal Navy, Ordnance Store Depot, Portsmouth
Eustace Vivian Bacon, Assistant, Secretariat, Ministry of Munitions
Francis Baker, Great Western Railway
Percy Montagu Baker, Technical Adviser, Training Section, Labour Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Thomas Edgar Baker, Assistant, Establishment Department, Ministry of Munitions
William Ernest Baker, Projectile Company, Ltd.
Joseph Alfred William Ballard, Torpedo Store Department, Admiralty
Victoria Vera Bannatyne, Secretary to the Devon and Cornwall War Refugees Committee
Alexander Bannerman, Head of the Clerical Staff, War Trade Intelligence Department
Frances Amy Barber, Officer in Charge, Red Cross Hub, 54 General Hospital, France
Samuel Henry Barber, Chief Officer, Northampton Special Constabulary
William Clarence Barber, Establishment Branch, Trench Warfare Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Thomas Barker, Chairman, Branston Rural Local Tribunal
Maj. Alfred George Barrett, Royal Engineers, Staff Clerk, Contracts Branch, H.M. Office of Works
Herbert Harry Baron, Non-technical Assistant, Machine Tool Department, Ministry of Munitions
Kenneth Delmar Barrett, Outside Manager, Messrs. Hawthorn, Leslie & Company
William James Barrett, Inspector of Woodwork, Woolwich Dockyard
Lt.-Commander Thomas Barwell Barrington RNVR Design Section, Air Board, Technical Department
Jonathan Barron, Fishery Officer of the Cornwall Local Sea Fisheries Committee
Olive Bartels, Lady Clerk, War Office
Harriet Barton, Commandant and Superintendent, Auxiliary Hospital, Budleigh Salterton
William Bate, National Explosives Company
Helen Maud Bax-Ironside, Munition Workers Welfare Committee (Y.W.C.A.) Organiser in Lancaster
Fane Fleming Baxter, War Refugees Committee
Bertha Marguerite Bayne, Chief Woman Inspector, Food Production Department
John William Bearder PhD Headmaster, Northallerton Grammar School; Honorary Secretary of Yorkshire North Riding Local Representative Committee, and of Belgian Refugee Committee
Edith Maude Beaver, Assistant Inspector, National Health Insurance Commission (England)
Herbert Bowman Beddall, Food Production Sub-Commissioner for Cornwall
Reginald Bedding ton, Divisional Commander, Metropolitan Special Constabulary
James Stuart Beddoe, Department of Director of Dockyards and Repairs, Admiralty
Richard William Bedford, Messrs. G. Ken Ltd.
Evelyn Belcher, Q.M., Auxiliary Hospital, Chippenham, Wiltshire
Violet Caroline Bell, Voluntary Aid Detachment, New Zealand Expeditionary Force
Gwendolen Edith Bellasis, Higher Grade Woman Clerk in the War Trade Department
Ernest Lampeer Bennett, Secretary in Charge, Yorkshire Division, Y.M.C.A.
Lt. John Baldwin Beresford, Secretary of the Professional Classes Committee of the Government Committee for the Prevention and Relief of Distress
Alice Eleanor Bernard, Contraband Department, Foreign Office
Stanley Howard Bersey, Explosives Factory Finance, Finance Department, Ministry of Munitions
F. H. Bevan, Technical Services Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Lois Biddle, Contraband Department, Foreign Office
William Henry Bignold, Collector of Customs and Excise, Leith
Thomas Edson Birbeck, Senior Bond Officer, Manchester, Ministry Of Munitions
Bertha Birch
Tom Birkett, Food Production Sub-Commissioner for Cumberland and Westmorland
Capt. Percy Bishop, Assistant Engineer engaged on Design of Aeroplanes at Royal Aircraft Factory
Mancra Winifred Black, Private Secretary to Acting Chief of British War Mission in U.S.A.
Frances Charlotte Isabella Blackett, Honorary Secretary for Perthshire, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Malcolm Blair, Manager, Messrs. Head, Wrightson & Company
Jack Percy Blake, Head of Priority Section, Explosives Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Thomas Blarney JP Bailie of Cowdenbeath
Nesta Blennerhassett, Lord Dunraven's Hospital Ship Grainaig
John William Arundel Bonner, Chairman of Southwell Rural Tribunal
Harold Arthur Box, Second in Charge, Motor Ambulance Department, Headquarters Staff, British Red Cross Society
Lota Boycott, Commandant, Bricket House Auxiliary Hospital, St. Albans
Elizabeth Frances Boyd, Ministry of National Service
Albert Edward Boyer MRCVS Conducting Officer, Horse Transport Duty
William Embrey Bradbury, London and North Western Railway
Henry Edward Manning Bradley, Staff Clerk, Supplies Division, H.M. Office of Works
Lt. The Hon. Oliver Sylvian Brett, Military Intelligence Branch, War Office
Edith Marian Brightman, Commandant, Fairneld Auxiliary Hospital, Broadstairs
Col. Arthur Rudston Brown, Deputy Director of Recruiting, Birmingham Area
Charles Frederick Brown, Military Sea Transport Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Fannie Florence Brown, Vice-President, Heaton Chapel Division, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
George Drake Brown
Tomyns Reginald Browne VD Inspector of Gun Ammunition (Supervisory), Ministry of Munitions
Bertha Marguerita Bruce, Inspection Welfare Superintendent, Ministry of Munitions, Birmingham
Maye Bruce, Commandant, Norton Hall Auxiliary Hospital, Campden, Gloucestershire
John Locktom Bryan, Superintendent of Registry, Food Production Department
Herbert William Bryant, Secretary in Charge, North Midland Division, Y.M.C.A.
Frederick Francis Smith Bryson, Sub-Section Director, Optical Munitions and Glass Department, Ministry of Munitions
James Buckman, Chairman, Bermondsey Advisory Committee, Ministry of National Service
Alfred Adolphus Bumpus JP Ex-Chairman of Loughborough Local Tribunal
Richard Edward Bumstead JP Member of East Kent Appeal Tribunal
Samuel Bunton JP Technical Officer to Shipyard Labour Department, Admiralty
Lt. Albert Edmund Burden, Stores Manager, Alexandria and Canal Zone, British Red Cross and Order of St. John
Arthur William Burgess, in charge of Aeronautical Supply Department Registry, Air Board
Elspeth Burgess, Chief Q.M., Newbury Auxiliary Hospital, Victoria Park, Manchester
John Laurence Burleigh, Chairman, Colchester Advisory Committee
George Alfred Burling, Private Secretary to Assistant Secretary, Establishment Department, Ministry of Munitions
Regiaulde de Maule Burn-Murdoch, Assistant County Director for City of Edinburgh, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Helen Jaqueline Burns, Scottish Organiser, Munition Workers Welfare Committee, Y.W.C.A.
Hedley Gravett Burrough, Secretary in Charge, South Eastern Division, Y.M.C.A.
Leopold Arthur Burrow, Chief Draughtsman to Chief Mechanical Engineer, War Office
Kate Ellen Burrows, Commandant, Voluntary Aid Detachment No. 22, Arnott Hill Auxiliary Hospital, Day brook, Nottinghamshire
John Burt JP Member of Appeal Tribunal, Dunfermline
Ethel Cadogan Burton Ballantine, Lady Superintendent, Army Pay Department
Isabel Burton-Mackenzie, Welfare Supervisor, Ministry of Munitions, National Projectile Factory, Cardonald, Glasgow
John Edwin Bury, Assistant Director of Finance, Royal Commission on Wheat Supplies
Clement Guy Caines, Accountant-General's Department, Admiralty
John Cairns JP Northumberland Miners Association; Member of Colliery Recruiting Court, Northumberland and North Durham
Norman Restell Cameron, Acting Shipyard Manager, Messrs. Thornycroft and Company
Clementina Henrietta Campbell, Trade Division, of the Naval Staff, Admiralty
Maj. Colin Clyde Campbell, Australian Imperial Force
Gilbert Campbell, Outside Manager, Wallsend Slipway and Engineering Company
Harry Campbell, Transport Superintendent o the War Refugees Committee
James Alexander West Campbell, Acting Accountant in the War Office
Capt. Thomas Epton Campey, Army Veterinary Stores Department
Henry Candler, Acting Staff Clerk, War Office
William Carnegie, Messrs. Cammell Laird & Company, Ltd.
Thomas William Carroll, Constructive Department, H.M. Dockyard, Portsmouth
Francis Tavor Carter, Secretary, London Central Association, Y.M.C.A.
William Carter, Clerk to the Horwich Urban District Council
Albert Wing Carver, Clerk to the Cannock Rural Local Tribunal
Francis Richard Cassidi MD Officer in Charge, Transport of First Line Hospitals, Derbyshire
The Hon. Alicia Margaret Cecil, Assistant Director of Horticultural Organisation, Food Production Department
Thomas Chadwick, Minor Staff Clerk, Treasury
Alfred Philip Chalkley, Chief Engineer, Motor Boat Service, Mesopotamia, British Red Cross Society
Bromley Challenor, Clerk to the Guardians, Abingdon
William Robert Challinor, Inspector, Wigan Special Constabulary
Margaret Chalmers, Administrative Assistant, Materials and Accessories Branch, Air Board
Harry Chambers, Chief Assistant, Seeds Section, Food Production Department
Guy Mortimer Chantrey, Trench Warfare Finance, Finance Department, Ministry of Munitions
Harry Cheesman, Chairman of Advisory Committee, Lewisham
Mary Alden Childers, Secretary of the Chelsea War Refugees Committee
Elizabeth Chinery, Commandant, Home Mead Auxiliary Hospital, Lymington
Owen Aly Clark JP Chief Officer, Special Constabulary, Bury St. Edmunds
Walter Leonard Clarke, Messrs. Benham & Sons, Ltd.
Edith Clarke, Teacher of Domestic Subjects, National Training School of Cookery
Thomas Henry Clarke, Mechanical Transport, Contracts Department, Ministry of Munitions
Charles Henry James Clayton, Chief Drainage Inspector, Food Production Department
Margaret Penelope Clegg, Commandant of Holden House Auxiliary Hospital, Boston, Lincolnshire
Edith Emily Clowes, Honorary Secretary, County of Herefordshire, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Alfred William Ayers-Cluett, Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
Ernest Frederick Coast, Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
Robert Bennett Cobb, First Class Clerk, Ministry of Pensions
Lady Gertrude Cochrane, President of the Fifeshire Branch, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Edward Cock, Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
Douglas Bennett Cockerell, Stores Accounting Officer, Ministry of Munitions
Frank William Coffey, Secretary in Charge, Midland Division, Y.M.C.A.
Edward George Cole JP Chairman of the Edmonton Military Hospital Committee
Harold William Cole, Chief Clerk, Petrol Department, Board of Trade
Capt. Francis William Colledge, Honorary Secretary and Acting County Director, Renfrewshire, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Lionel Dennis Collins, Collector of Fishery Statistics in North Shields
Beatrice Annie Collinson, Commandant in Charge, Auxiliary Hospital, Stramongate, Westmorland
Walter William Coltman JP Chief Officer, Loughborough Special Constabulary
Charles Leonard Compton, Senior Staff Clerk in the Registry-General of Shipping and Seamen
Geraldine Emily Coningham, Oakhurst Auxiliary Hospital, Erith
Jessie Murdoch Connell, Commandant of Myrtle Auxiliary Hospital, Myrtle Street, Liverpool
James Conner, Messrs. Dick Kerr, Ltd.
Fred Compigne Cook, Chief Aliens Officer, Port of London
Richard Frederic Cook, Section Director, Railway Materials Branch, Ministry of Munitions
Cuthbert Cresswell Cooke, Projectile Contracts, Contracts Department, Ministry of Munitions
Henry James Cooksey, Class A Clerk, War Office
Arthur Henry Coombe, Accountant-General's Department, Admiralty
William Walter Coombs, Staff Clerk, Companies Department, Board of Trade
Bertram George Cooper, Head of Sub-section of Air Board Technical Department
Lt. H. M. Cooper, Assistant Inspector of Munitions, Canada
James Cooper, Class A Clerk, War Office
John Cooper, President of the North Staffordshire Miners Association; Assessor to the Colliery Recruiting Court
Clarence George Copus, Head of the Oiler Section, Ministry of Shipping
Maj. Edward Richard Trevor Corbett, District Recruiting Officer, No. 4 District
Hilda Eliza Agar Cordeaux, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Louth, Lincolnshire
John Corrigan, Member of Appeal Tribunal, Ayr
Howard Denys Russell Cowan, British Vice-Consul, Havana
William Cowan, Works Manager, Messrs. Palmer's Jarrow Shipyard
Randolph Lewis Coward, First Class Assistant Accountant in the War Office
Juliet Sisley Craig, Commandant of the Hillingdon Auxiliary Hospital, Hayes End, Middlesex
James Crawley, Stores Department, Headquarters Staff, British Red Cross Society
Edward Patrick Creegan, Superintendent of the Drawing Department of the Ordnance Survey of the United Kingdom
Gerald Faulkner Cripps, Secretary of the Committee for Providing Hostels for Disabled Men under Training
Helena Jane Crisp, Voluntary Aid Detachment Department, British Red Cross Society
Herbert Lawson Critchley, Sub-Section Director in Charge, Efficiency Section, Gun Ammunition Manufacture, Ministry of Munitions
William Gordon Crockett, Junior Clerk, Stores Department, India Office
George Scott Cromar, Sr., Outside Manager of Messrs. D. & W. Henderson & Company
Winifred Eyre Crompton-Roberts, Honorary Secretary, Auxiliary Hospital, Monmouth
Ann Ellen Cropper, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Portskewitt, Monmouthshire
Ernest Cross, Staff Officer, Rotherham Special Constabulary
Robert Cross, Station Master, Midland Railway, Tilbury
William Cuickshank, Assistant Inspector of Carriages, Ministry of Munitions
Janet Baron Cumming, Organising Secretary in Scotland, Munition Workers Welfare Committee, Y.W.C.A.
Margaret Georgiana Cuninghame, Honorary Secretary and Superintendent of Ayrshire Surgical Work Depot
Marghuerita Copeland Currie, Canteen Inspector, Munition Workers Welfare Committee, Y.W.C.A.
George Charles Cusens, Torpedo Store Department, Admiralty
John Cuthberfeson, Ernest Edward Cutler, Messrs. Cutler & Sons
James Daglish, Outside Manager of North-Eastern Marine Engineering Company, Ltd.
Ellen Frances Darlow, Commandant of Auxiliary Hospital, Presbyterian Hall, Northwood, Middlesex
William Elliot Darrach, Technical Services Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Grace Emilie Davey, in charge of Women Staff, Labour Department, Ministry of Munitions
George Frederick Davidson, Personal Assistant to Council Member G, Ministry of Munitions
Sophia Katherine Davies, Welfare Supervisor, Ministry of Munitions, National Projectile Factory, Templeboro
Alfred Thomas Davies, Assistant, Priority Department, Ministry of Munitions
Arthur Vernon Davies MB Assistant County Director Representing; the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, East Lancashire
Gwilym Meirion Davies, Secretary, Ministry of Munitions District Office, No. 2 Area (North-West England)
Hugh Christopher Davies, Secretary, Norfolk War Agricultural Executive Committee
Walter Davies, Secretary to the Local Representative Committee for Baling
Thomas Daw, Assistant Director of Recruiting, Central London Area[12]
Horace Christian Dawkins, Divisional Commander, Metropolitan Special Constabulary
George William Dawson, Private Secretary to Acting Member of Council A, Ministry of Munitions
Beatrice Mary Dawson-Thomas, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Old Baux Buildings, Minehead
George Day, Naval Store Department, Admiralty
Edgar Reginald Deacon, Research Department, Woolwich Arsenal
Frederic William Charles Dean, Manager, Gun and Carriage Factories, Woolwich Arsenal
Seth Ellis Dean, Chairman, Sleaford Rural Tribunal
Phyllis Lucy Deane, Commandant, Sandy Auxiliary Hospital; Bedford
Albert Deighton, Chief Engineer and Works Manager, Messrs. Steel, Peech, and Tozer, Ltd.[12]
Adam Fairrie Denniston, Supervisor for the Eastern District of Scotland Red Cross Depot
Hubert Augutus Dent, In charge of Issue of Drafts, Finance Department, Ministry of Munitions
Lady Lilian Mary Harriet Diana Digby, Commandant, Voluntary Aid Detachment No. 94; Donor, Holnest Auxiliary Hospital, Sherborne
Charles William Dixon, Second Class Clerk, Colonial Office; Private Secretary to the Permanent Undersecretary of State
Annie Emilia Scott Elliott Doig, Lady Superintendent, All Welcome Y.M.C.A. Hut, Victoria
William Donald, Assistant Manager for Submarines, Messrs. Vickers, Ltd.
William John Dorrell, Assistant to Head of Shipping Intelligence Section, Ministry of Shipping
Aileen Margaret Dougherty, Foreign Claims Office
Allie Vibert Douglas, Statistical Department, Ministry of National Service
Percy Bissett Down, Assistant Inspector of Guns, Ministry of Munitions
John Drake, Assistant Superintendent of Registry, Treasury
Sidney William Drinkwater, Second Division Clerk, Home Office
Edith Marion Drummond Smith, Organiser of Munition Workers Hute, Munition Workers Welfare Committee, Y.W.C.A.
Duncan Drysdale, Finance Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Bernard Phineas Dudding, Assistant, National Physical Laboratory
Reginald Franklin Hare Duke, General Secretary to the Commission Internationale de Ravitaillement, Board of Trade
Frank Hay Dunbar, Head of the Registry of the Restriction of Enemy Supplies Department
James Dunley, Member of Appeal Tribunal, Alloa
Frederick George Dunlop, Outside Manager of Messrs. Harland & Wolff's Belfast Works
William Louis Martial Dunlop, Staff Clerk, Foreign Office
Mabel Alethea Dupe, Lady Superintendent, Y.M.C.A. Shakespeare Hut, Gower Street
Frederick Harold Dupre FCS Official Chemical Adviser on Explosives to the Home Office and Ministry of Munitions
William Duran JP Honorary Sheriff Substitute of Caithness, Orkney, and Shetland; Member of Appeal Tribunal, Caithness
Beatrice Aimee Dutton, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Windlesham Moor, Windlesham, Surrey
Harold George Eadie, Secretary, Ministry of Munitions District Office, No. 4 Area (Midlands)
Edward Herbert Eagar, Senior Examiner, Pay Office
Herbert Eborall, Accountant-General's Department, Admiralty
Stuart Strickland Moore Ede, Sub-section Director, Raw Materials Branch, Ministry of Munitions
John Francis Edmonds, Superintendent, London Telephone Service
Edith Constance Edwards, Commandant, Voluntary Aid Detachment No. 272, County of London; Organiser of Flag Day Collections in Marylebone
Edward Tregaskiss Elbourne, Shop Superintendent, Ponders End Shell Works, Ponders End, Middlesex
Archibald Sefton Elford, Ministry of Shipping
Mabel Beatrice Elliott, Assistant Censor, War Office
William Elliott, Outside Shipyard Manager of Messrs. J. L. Thompson & Sons
Amy Amelia Ellis, Commandant, St. Aidan's Auxiliary Hospital, Cleethorpes
Frank Ellison, Messrs. Hadfields, Ltd.
Horace Milton Emery, Technical Adviser, Mechanical Cultivation Division, Food Production Department
George Ernest Emmett, Acting Paymaster, Army Pay Department
Frederick George Eshelby, Head of Military Traffic Department, North-Eastern Railway
George Gall Esslemont, Executive Officoer for Food Production, County of Aberdeen; Organiser of Egg Collection in the North Eastern District, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Harriet Estill, Lady Superintendent and Hon. Secretary, Highfield Auxiliary Hospital, Malton, Yorkshire
Christopher Douglas Evans, Superintendent, Remount Depot, Ballsbridge
Edward Percy Everest, Clerk to the Atcham Rural District Council
James Alfred Fage, Department of Director of Dockyards and Repairs
Robert Faikney, Departmental Manager of the Dock Department, Fanfield Shipbuilding and Engineering Company
Marie-Antoinette Fairholme, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Hathersage, Derbyshire
James Falconer
Samuel Maddams Fane, Staff Clerk, Supplies Division, H.M. Office of Works
Edwin Wood Thorp Farley JP Mayor of Dover; Chairman of the Dover Local Tribunal
Alexander Farquharson, Assistant in Local Authorities Division, Ministry of Food
Capt. William Scott Farren, in charge of Aero-Dynamics at Royal Aircraft Factory
Edith M. Feast, Honorary Secretary to Kobe British Ladies Patriotic League
Katherine Fedden, Chairman, Belgravia War Hospital Supply Depot
Alfred Ernest Fellowes, Forwarding Agent, Ministry of Munitions, Liverpool
Charles Ernest Fenton, Staff Officer, Post Office Stores Department
Harriet Frances Fenwick, Lady Superintendent, Army Pay Department
Florence Fetherstonhaugh, Vice-President and Organiser, Hazelwood Auxiliary Hospital, Ryde, Isle of Wight
Elizabeth Susan Findlay, Superintendent of Women Munition Workers Canteen, Crayford
Georgina Julia Findlay-Hamilton
David John Finlayson, Chief Accountant, Headquarters Staff, British Red Cross Society
Benjamin Kingston Finnimore, Assistant County Director, Dorsetshire, and Hon. Secretary for Sherborne Division, British Red Cross Society
Clare Jane Firth, Matron, Withington Military Hospital
Honoria Mary Fisher, Commandant, Waltham Town Hall Auxiliary Hospital, Waltham Abbey
Henry FitzMaurice, First Class Assistant in Siam Consular Service
Basil Fletcher, Acting Professional Clerk, Department of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Watson Foggo, Manager, Cartridge Filling Factory, Aintree, Ministry of Munitions
Robert Charles Follett, Adjutant, Hull Special Constabulary
Mary Constance Forbes, Honorary Secretary of Red Cross Work Parties in the City of Edinburgh
John Ford, Works Manager, Parsons Marine Steam Turbine Company
William Robinson Lidderdale Forrest, Senior Bond Officer, Birmingham, Ministry of Munitions
Andrew Forster, Works Manager, Engine Side, Messrs. J. S. White & Company
John Forster JP Ex-Mayor of St. Helens; Chairman of St. Helens Local Tribunal
Frederick Walter Fossey, Senior Bond Officer, Newcastle, Ministry of Munitions
Henry Knollys Foster, Secretary and Executive Officer, Herefordshire War Agricultural Executive Committee
William Melville Foster, in charge, Censored Cables, Ministry of Munitions
Edward Turner Fowell, Explosives Contracts Finance, Finance Department, Ministry of Munitions
Helene Fowle, President of the Committee for Dealing with the Interests of Belgians in Ireland
Eveline Georgina Fowler, Founder and Manager of the Gunton Cottage Hospital for Naval Cases, Lowestoft
John Jacob Fox DSc FIC First Class Analyst, Government Laboratory
Evelyn Margaret Fraser
Thomas Houston Fraser, Contractors Claims for Increased Prices, Contracts Department, Ministry of Munitions
Edward James Frewen, Section Director, Railway Materials Branch, Ministry of Munitions
Elizabeth Rowley Frisby, Y.M.C.A. Worker
William Percy Froud, Superintendent to the Joint Railway Lines, Portsmouth
Dorothy Margaret Fry, Private Secretary to Director-General of Munitions Supply, Ministry of Munitions
Walter Everard Fuller, Superintendent, Contraband Department Registry
Mary Edith Galilee, Superintendent of Women Munition, Workers Canteen, Hayes
Christian McDowall Gall, Private Secretary to Additional Member of Council R., Ministry of Munitions
John Dunn Gamble, British and Foreign Sailors Society, Derry
Henry John Edward Garcia, Inspector of Taxes, Inland Revenue
Albert Gard, Clerk to the Guardians, Devonport; Secretary to the Plymouth Prince of Wales Fund Committee
Nora Hilton Gardner, Q.M., Hoole Bank Auxiliary Hospital, Cheshire
Caroline Sugden Garnett, Commandant, Fairhope Auxiliary Hospital, Pendleton, Manchester
Helen Maude Dorothy Garnett, Organiser of Women Munition Workers, Canteens and Clubs, Y.W.C.A.
Constance Elizabeth Garside, Superintendent of Women Munition Workers Canteen and Social Work, Dursley
Reginald Genower, Assistant in Statistical Branch, Ministry of Food
William Geoghegan, County Director, City of Dublin, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Allan Gibb, Rifle and Machine Gun Contracts, Contracts Department, Ministry of Munitions
Herbert Mends Gibson, Chairman of Transport Committee, East Lancashire, British Red Cross Society
William Howieson Gibson, Research Department, Woolwich Arsenal
William Charles Ernest Gibson, Divisional Commander, Metropolitan Special Constabulary
Thomas Arthur Walter Giffard, Military Intelligence Branch, War Office
George Julian Gilbert, Staff Clerk, Civil Liabilities Committee
Violet Adeline Gilbert, Personal Clerk to the President of the Board of Agriculture
Robert Giles, Assistant Yard Manager, Messrs. Sir W. G. Armstrong, Whitworth & Company, Ltd.
James Searle Gillingham, Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
Maud Glennie, Late Private Secretary to Assistant Financial Secretary, Ministry of Munitions
Patrick Gordon Glennie, Ministry of Shipping
James William Sleigh Godding JP Chairman, Plymouth Advisory Committee
Albert Hamilton Godfrey, Chairman, Woking Local Tribunal
Fanny Augusta Going, Lady Superintendent, Auxiliary Hospital, Littlehampton
Edward Goldsmith, Divisional Commander, Metropolitan Special Constabulary
Alfred Gollin, Divisional Commander, Metropolitan Special Constabulary
Herbert Gooch, Confidential Clerk to Q.M. General, War Office
Stanley Vernon Goodall, Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
Alwyn Valerie Goodchild, Voluntary Aid Detachment, New Zealand Expeditionary Force
Joshua Goodland, Assistant, Classification Section, Priority Department, Ministry of Munitions
Walter Goodwin, Assistant (Hospitals) Architect, War Office
Helen Goodyear, Administrative Assistant, Contracts Branch, Air Board
Percy Goodyear, Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
George Gordon, Expense Accounts Department, H.M. Dockyard, Devonport
Robert Gordon, Mobilization Division, Admiralty Naval Staff
Lily Gordon-Steward, Commandant, Voluntary Aid Detachment No. 26, St. John's Hospital, Weymouth
Capt. Gorman Gorman
Sandford George Gorton, Assistant Cable Engineer, General Post Office
John Henry Gorvin, Assistant Secretary, Royal Commission on Wheat Supplies
John Benjamin Gotts, Superintendent of Manchester Branch, H.M. Stationery Office
Claude William Shepard Gould, Assistant Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Barnstaple
Robert Vaughan Gower, Mayor of Tunbridge Wells
Christopher Colborne Graham, Mayor of Scarborough; Chairman of Local Tribunal
Lt. Cuthbert Graham, Royal Engineers, Trench Warfare Research Department, Ministry of Munitions
David Morgan Graham JP
Lt.-Col. William Grant, American Remount Commission
Reginald Coupland Graves, Clerk to the Tottenham Urban District Council; Clerk to the Local Tribunal and Local Representative Committee
Charles Harold Gray, Acting Paymaster, Army Pay Department
William Gray, British Vice-Consul at Oruro, Bolivia
Constance Mary Greaves, Donor and Matron, Wern Auxiliary Hospital, Portmadoc
Alexander John Green, Secretary-in-Charge, London Division, Y.M.C.A.
Hettie Mary Green, Honorary Secretary, General Service Section, and Organiser, Nottinghamshire, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Edith Mary Greenfield, Superintendent of Women Munition Workers Club, Newcastle
Capt. Cecil Anstey Greet, Instructor in Catering, War Office
Alvero Church Gregson, In Charge of Checking Department, American Branch, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Robert Holmes Arbuthnot Gresson, Adjutant, Remount Service
Charles William Grey, Surveyor (temporary), War Office
James Dyce Grieve, Staff Clerk, Board of Agriculture for Scotland
The Reverend Ellis Hughes Griffith, Chairman of Aethewy (Anglesey) Local Tribunal
Helen Maud Griffiths
James Thomas Grimbly, Senior Clerk, Recruiting Department, Ministry of National Service
Henry Grimsdall, Transport Officer, Middlesex, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Ellen Maud Grimsley, Secretary to the County Director, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem, Leicestershire
John Gritton, Staff Clerk, Foreign Office
Susannah Groom, Commandant of Allan House Auxiliary Hospital, Boston, Lincolnshire
Professor Percy Groom DSc Head of Section of Technical Department of Air Board
Maj. John James Grubb, Q.M. General's Department, War Office
Allan Wilson Grundy, Naval Store Department, H.M. Dockyard, Portsmouth
Charles John Tench Bedford Grylls, Committee Clerk, Customs and Excise
Matilda Ida Gubbins, Organiser and Commandant, High Wycombe Auxiliary Hospital
Capt. Philip Edward Gummer, Royal Engineers, Staff Officer, Royal Engineers, Irish Command
Olive Francis Guthrie-Smith, Head Masseuse, Almeric Paget Military Massage Corps
Frederick Weston Hadden, Private Secretary to the Financial Secretary of the Admiralty
William Hadnutt, Instructional Manager, Training Section; Labour Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Bernard Parker Haigh DSc Instructor in Applied Mechanics, Royal Naval College, Greenwich
Harry Francis Hall, Technical Assistant, First Class, H.M. Office of Works
John Hall JP
John William Halloran, Town Clerk, Chatham; Clerk to the Chatham Local Tribunal
Emily Moore Hamilton, Controller of Welfare and Chief Superintendent of Girl Messengers, War Office
William Cecil Hammond, Divisional Commander, Metropolitan Special Constabulary
George Hankinson, Clerk to the Guardians, Bridlington; Clerk to the Local Representative Committee
Maj. Arthur Leonard Hanna, Inspecting Officer-to Mechanical Transport, Ministry of Munitions1
Clarence Oldham Hanson, Assistant Deputy Surveyor, Forest of Dean
Second Lt. Peter Kydd Hanton, Royal Engineers, Assistant Architect, 2nd Class, H.M. Office of Works
James Hardman, Assistant Architect, War Office
Frank Philip Hardy, Travelling Inspector, Central Stores Department, Ministry of Munitions
Maj. George Samuel Harries, Chairman, Swansea Advisory Committee
Ethel Harris, Superintendent of Women Munition Workers Clubs, Erith and Carlisle
Capt. Samuel Wallace Harris, Q.M., Headquarters, Irish Command
William Thomas Hooper Harris, Chief Examiner, War Office
George Hart-Cox, Munitions Stores Officer, Woolwich Arsenal
Maj. Edward John Morewood Harvey, Assistant Inspector of Small Arms, Ministry of Munitions
Commander Edwin William Harvey, Royal Naval Reserve, Dock Master, Southampton, London and South-Western Railway
Capt. Nicholas Charles Harvey, Q.M., Headquarters, Northern Command
William Harvey, Chief Inspector, Stockport Special Constabulary
Charles Frederick Harvie, Supervising Clerk, War Office
James Henry Harwood, Travelling Inspector, Central Stores Department, Ministry of Munitions
Arthur Haskins, Works Manager, Messrs. Hoffman Manufacturing Company Limited, Chelmsford
Capt. Thomas Wilfred Haslam, Deputy Assistant Director of Railway Transport, Australian Imperial Force
Peter Hastie, Shipyard Manager, Messrs. J. S. White & Company
Robert Haswell, Secretary, Messrs. W. Doxford & Sons
Albert Victor Hawkins, Chief Inspector, Metropolitan Police
Thomas Shirley Hawkins, Director of Works Department, Admiralty
Henrietta Louisa Hay, Organiser of Canteens in London Area, Munition Workers Welfare Committee, Y.W.C.A.
Arthur W. Hayes, Secretary-in-Charge, East Kent Division, Y.M.C.A.
Fredric James Hayes, Honorary Secretary-in-Charge, Lancashire Division, Y.M.C.A.
Robert Hollbwell Headley, Staff Clerk, Military Department, India Office
Arthur William Heasman Assistant Architect, 2nd Class, H.M. Office of Works
Maj. Herbert Charles Selwyn Heath, Deputy Assistant Inspector of Recruiting, Northern Command
Florence Agnes Hebb, Chief Superintendent of Typists in Aeronautical Supply Department, Air Board
Alice Craig Henderson, Lady Superintendent, Knighton Auxiliary Hospital, Evington, Leicester
George Blake Henderson, Works Manager on the Engineering Side, Messrs. Thornycroft & Company
Jane Selina Henry
John Henry, Private Secretary to the Secretary of the War Trade Department
Agnes Mary Herbert, Voluntary Aid Detachment, New Zealand Expeditionary Force
John Tordiffe Hewetson, Late Deputy Cashier in Charge, Royal Navy Torpedo Factory, Greenock
James Baylis Heynes, British Vice-Consul at Messina
Henry George Hibberd, Ordnance Store Department, Admiralty
Frank Sidney Higman, Y.M.C.A. Secretary for Wales
Elizabeth Annie Higson
Arthur James Hill, Assistant, Establishment Department, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Henry Hincks, Ministry of National Service
William Edwin Hincks JP Chairman of Leicester War Pensions Committee and Representative of the Ministry of Pensions, East Midlands
Arthur Sidney Hines, Assistant, Staff Records and Premises, Labour Department, Ministry of Munitions
Violet Verve Hobart, Donor and Administrator, West Cliff Hall Auxiliary Hospital, Hythe
William Stanley Hocking, Actuarial Clerk, War Trade Statistical Department
Arthur Hogan, Chief Examiner, Exchequer and Audit Department
Maj. George Justice Hogben, Auditor, Australian Imperial Force[12]
Lt. George Vincent Hoile, Royal Artillery, Ordnance Department, War Office
Frank Holgate-Smith, Divisional Commandant, Kent Voluntary Aid Detachment, Superintendent of the St. John Ambulance Brigade, Canterbury
Edith Clara Holland, Commandant, Cheadle House Auxiliary Hospital, Cheadle
Frank Herbert Holloway, Assistant Superintending Engineer, Ministry of Munitions, No. 2 Area (North-West England)
Annie Gertrude Holmes, Organiser of Naval Hospital, Hull
Charles Stuart Hooper, Cashier the Finance Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Charles Nugent Hope-Wallace, Ministry of Shipping
Harry Sinclair Hopkins, Senior Bond Officer, St. Helens, Ministry of Munitions
Sydney Hopping, Acting Chief Examiner, Exchequer and Audit Department
Walter Hopps, Commercial Steel Section, Iron and Steel Department, Ministry of Munitions
Florence Julia Horden, Commandant, Bryn Glas Auxiliary Hospital, Newport, Monmouthshire
Andrew Coutts Home JP Shipping Agent, Queenstown
Lt. Henry Spence Home, in charge, Registry, Whitehall Place, Ministry of Munitions
John Laurence Hornibrook, Workman's Compensation Claims Finance Department, Ministry of Munitions
E. F. Houghton, in charge of Drawing Office, American Branch, Ministry of Munitions
Maj. Alexander McLean Houston, Assistant to Officer in Charge of Canadian Records
Arthur Henry Howard, Assistant, Legal Section, Priority Department, Ministry of Munitions
Carter William Howard, Deputy Superintendent of Printing, H.M. Stationery Office
Holly Howard, Honorary Secretary, Special and General Service Department, East Lancashire, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Maj. Alfred Harry Huddart, Inspecting Officer to Mechanical Transport, Ministry of Munitions
Llewelyn Hugh-Jones, Honorary Representative of the Ministry of Pensions, North Wales
Edward Hughes JP Ex-Mayor of Wrexham; Member of Wrexham Local Tribunal and of East Denbighshire Appeal Tribunal
Helen Cornelia Huleatt, Officer in Charge, Hoole Bank and Hoole House Auxiliary Hospitals, Cheshire; Secretary, Chester City Division, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Edith Louisa Sophia Humphreys, Secretary to Surveyor-General of Supplies, War Office
Harold Goundrill Humphreys, Sub-Section Director, Inland Transport, Ministry of Munitions
Charles Henry Hunt, Clerk in Charge of Accounts, Treasury Solicitor's Department
Joseph Henry Hunt, Superintendent, Supply Reserve Depot, Cattle Market, Deptford
William Wright Hunt JP Chairman, Woodbridge Local Tribunal
Capt. John Leslie Hunter, Head of Horse Supply Section, Food Production Department
Marion Janet Hunter, Honorary Secretary to the Voluntary Aid Detachment Central Selection Board for Scotland
Thomas Briggs Hunter, Civil Engineer, H.M. Dockyard, Rosyth
Wilfred Leavold Hutchinson, Inspector, Small Arms Ammunition Department, Ministry of Munitions
Lt. Alfred Hutt, Sub-Section Director, Raw Materials Branch, Ministry of Munitions
John Hutt, Ordnance Store Department, Woolwich
William Ross Hutton, Shipyard Manager, Messrs. R. & W. Hawthorn, Leslie & Company, Ltd.
Arthur Frederick Ilsley, Assistant Secretary of the Iron and Steel Committee and Secretary of the Engineering Committee
Frank Impey, Superintendence and Co-ordination of Brass Rod for Ministry of Munitions in Birmingham
Kate Inglis, Assistant Superintendent and Secretary, Princess Louise Convalescent Home for Nursing Sisters, France
Blanche Ireland, Deputy Unit Administrator, Woman's Army Auxiliary Corps
Lt. William Henry Martin Ives, Offices of the War Cabinet
James Robertson Jack, Works Manager, Messrs. Denny Bros
Alice Mabel Erskine Jackson
Arthur Jackson, Trench Warfare Contracts, Contracts Department, Ministry of Munitions
Capt. Hugh Willan Jackson, Commandant, Wellingborough Special Constabulary
Joseph Clough Jackson, Honorary Secretary of the Belgian Refugees Committee, Leeds
James Picton James, Private Secretary to Controller, Raw Materials Branch, Ministry of Munitions
Thomas Gwynfab James, Director of Elementary Education for the County of Monmouthshire
William Arthur James, in charge, Compilation of Technical Costs, Contracts Department, Ministry of Munitions
Alexander Jamieson, Provost of Darvel; Member of Appeal Tribunal
Charles Fleming Jamieson, Works Manager of Royal Albert Dock Branch of Messrs. R. & H. Green & Silley Weir Ltd.
Lt. T. S. W. Jarvis, Interpreter to British Military Section in Russia, Ministry of Munitions
Charles Nicholas Theodore Jeffreys, Chief Clerk, Brighton Special Constabulary
Lt.-Commander Charles Frewen Jenkin RNVR Air Board Technical Department
Albert David Jenkins, Town Clerk of Guildford; Clerk to Guildford Local Tribunal, Belgian Refugee Committee, and Local Representative Committee
Garnett Longsdon Jerrard, Archivist to His Britannic Majesty's Legation in Switzerland
Frank Ashton Jewell JP Mayor of Barnstaple; Chairman of Barnstaple Local Tribunal
Capt. Herbert Cecil Joel, in charge of Army Ordnance Depot, Gloucester Docks
Frederick William Johnson, Manager, Southwark Filling Factory, Ministry of Munitions
Samuel Johnson, Principal Clerk, Stamps and Stores, Inland Revenue
William Johnson MP Warwickshire Miners Association, Member of Colliery Recruiting Court, Warwickshire
John Jolly, Victualling Department, Admiralty
Edmund Vaughan Jones, Principal Assistant to Shipyard Manager, Messrs. Cammell Laird and Company, Ltd.
George Jones, Special Constable attached to Chief Constable's Office, Portsmouth
Harold Spencer Jones, Assistant Inspector of Optical Stores, Ministry of Munitions
James Stuart Jones Inspector of Telegraph and Telephone Traffic, General Post Office
Walter Owen Jones, Clerk to the Anglesey County Council; Clerk to Appeal Tribunal; Secretary, Anglesey War Agricultural Executive Committee
Capt. Cerdric Batson Joyner, Protected Badges and Occupations, Labour Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Charles Ernest William Justice, Military Sea Transport Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Sydney Entwisle Kay, British Vice-Consul, Stockholm
Arthur Richard Kearney, Chief Technical Adviser, Technical Organisation of Instructional Factories, Ministry of Munitions
Margaret Alice Keary, Assistant Q.M., Auxiliary Hospital, Torquay
Annie Margaret Keeble Smith, Welfare Superintendent, The Aston Construction Company, Ltd., London
Frank Arthur Kelly, Senior Clerk, Metropolitan Asylums Board
James Kelly, in charge, Price List of Munitions, Contracts Department, Ministry of Munitions
Robert Kelly, General Outside Manager, Engine Department, Messrs. Alexander Stephen & Sons
John Howard Kemp Welch, Messrs. Peter Brotherhood Limited
William James Kenny, Civilian Clerk, Army Ordnance Department
Helen Bethea Ker, Vice-President, Dumbartonshire Branch; of the Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Gladys Louise Kidd, Clerk in Charge of Copying Room, Treasury
Arthur Frederic Kidson, Town Clerk, Folkestone; Clerk to the Folkestone Local Tribunal
Flight Lt. Leon Joseph Killmayer, Royal Navy, Production Officer, Seaplanes Branch, Air Board
Norah King, Commandant, Voluntary Aid Detachment No. 26, Willingham Auxiliary Hospital, Cambridgeshire
Henry Smails King, Acting Accountant in the War Office
Mabel Cecil Kirk, Superintendent of Station Hut for Women Munition Workers, Coventry
Richard Cameron Kirkwood, The Yorkshire Boiler Company Ltd.
Wilfrid Robert Klitz, Agent for Furs and Skins, War Office
Frank Knight, Second Class Clerk, Prison Commission
George Knight, Photographer, The Central News Agency
George Stodart Knocker, Assistant Engineer, Ministry of Munitions, No. 4 Area (Midlands)
Edwin Lack, Assistant Staff Engineer, General Post Office
Andrew Lamb, Great Northern Railway (Declined honour.)[12]
Brydon Lamb, Military Service (Civil Liabilities) Committee
Dorothy Lamb, Ministry of National Service
Helena Jane Landells, First Class Clerk, General Post Office, attached to War Office
Harry Joseph Lane, Director, Messrs. J. J. Lane, Limited, London
George Langlands, Outdoor Manager, Dock Department, Engine Side, Messrs. Beardmore & Company
Alfred Tabods Larter, Aeronautics Contracts, Contracts Department, Ministry of Munitions
Ernest Lingwood Lawes, Senior Officer, Southend-on-Sea Special Constabulary
Aubrey Trevor Lawrence, Secretary to the Central Stores Department, Ministry of Munitions
Ernest Laws, Clerk, Local Government Board
Maud Matilda Layton, Head Masseuse, Almeric Paget Military Massage Corps
William Leek, Inspector of Metalliferous Mines
Arthur Leggett, Works Manager, Messrs. E. R. and F. Turner, Ipswich
Lt. George Legh-Jones, Naval Sea Transport Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Louis Levi, Manager of Trench Warfare Department Watford Filling Factory, Ministry of Munitions
Janet Marion Terry Lewis, Lady Superintendent, Ministry of Labour
Jessie Liddiard, Superintendent of Women Clerks, Ministry of Pensions
Edgar William Light, Treaty Department, Foreign Office
Henry Lightbody JP Honorary Secretary, Y.M.C.A. in Scotland
Charles Swift Lillicrap, Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
Frederic Caesar Linfield JP Assistant, Munitions Inventions Department
Agnes Evelyn Linnell, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Sheringham, Norfolk
William Little, London, Brighton and South Coast Railway
Geraldine Livesey, Inspection Assistant Welfare Superintendent, Woolwich Arsenal
Frederick Allen Llewellyn, Assistant Architect, 2nd Class, H.M. Office of Works
William Ewart Llewellyn, Superintendent of Chart Issues, Hydrographic Department, Admiralty
Daniel Charles Lloyd, Messrs. F. H. Lloyd & Company, Ltd.
Alice Lloyd Jones, Commandant, Cecil Road Auxiliary Hospital, Hale
Thomas Lockwood-Bunce, Technical Inspecting Engineer, Machine Tool Department, Ministry of Munitions
Edith Annie Lomax, Controller, Women Staff, Military Intelligence Branch, War Office
Arthur Thompson Longbotham, Clerk to the Guardians, Halifax
Arthur Frederick Longdon, Chairman, Derby Local Tribunal
Charles Lupton Lord, Collector of Customs and Excise, Hull
Frederic Reynolds Lovett, Labour Enlistment Complaint Section, Labour Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Catherine Howard Lowe, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, New Mills, Derbyshire
Dorothy Ann Shelmerdine Lowe, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Hinton St. George, Crewkerne, Somerset
Robert Luck, Assistant Commandant, Islington Internment Camp
Horace Sampson Lyne, Superintendent, Newport (Mon.) Special Constabulary
Eva Flora Caroline Macdonald
Florence Macdonald, Superintendent of Women Munition Workers Club, Lancaster
John Angus Macdonald JP Chairman, Ilkeston Local Tribunal; Member of Ilkeston Local Representative Committee and of Executive Committee of Derbyshire Representative Committee
Walter Mace Macfarlane, of Sir W. G. Armstrong, Whitworth & Company, Ltd.
Archibald Bow Macgregor, Shipyard Manager to Ailsa Shipbuilding Company
John MacGregor, District Superintendent, Caledonian Railway, Aberdeen
Eric Machtig, Second Class Clerk, Colonial Office
John Andrew Macintyre, Assistant Engineer, H.M. Office of Works
Colin MacKay, Station Master, Highland Railway, Inverness
John George Mackay, Member of Appeal Tribunal, Isle of Skye
George Frank Mackrow, Inside Manager, Warship Work, Messrs. R. & W. Hawthorn, Leslie & Company
William Archibald MacLellan, Shop Superintendent, Austin Motor Company, Ltd., Birmingham
John MacQueen, Works Manager on Machinery Side, Messrs. Denny Brothers
Margaret Marsden Macqueen, Assistant Director, Women's Branch, Food Production Department
Frank Macers, Chief Assistant, Design and Construction of Explosives Factories, Ministry of Munitions
Melville Pownall Main, In charge of French Section, Allied Branch, Requirements and Statistics Department, Ministry of Munitions
Adam Maitland DL JP Chairman of City of Aberdeen Local Tribunal Advisory Committee
Agatha Caroline Makins, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Henley-on-Thames
Jeanne Marie Malcolm, Lady Secretary at Headquarters, Y.M.C.A.
William Malcolm, Executive Officer for Food Production, Lanarkshire
John Moore Mallett, Personal Assistant to the Director of Works, Admiralty
Frederick Mallinson, Commissioned Auxiliary Fleet Section, Ministry of Shipping
Gerard Noel Cornwallis Mann, Tractor Representative for Norfolk and Suffolk, Food Production Department
William Henry Mann, County Director, Tyrone, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem; Treasurer of Our Day Fund in Ulster
Albert John Manning, Senior Clerk, Recruiting Department, Ministry of National Service
Helen Marchbank, Assistant in British Consulate, Tampico
Ethel Gertrude Marriott, Inspection Welfare Superintendent, Ministry of Munitions, Manchester and East Lancashire
Beatrix Maria Martin, Late Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Shrubland Park, Coddenham, Suffolk
Ernest Charles Martin, Head of Labour Supply Section, Food Production Department
John Bentick Martin, British Vice-Consul at Trondhjem
William Thomas Mason, Constructive Department, H.M. Dockyard, Devonport
Joseph Louis Mather, In charge, Artificers Allocation Section, Labour Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
William Thomas Matthews, Staff Clerk, War Trade Statistical Department
Paul John Mavrogordato, Personal Assistant to Controller, Finance Department, Ministry of Munitions
Lucy Powys Maybery, Commandant, Voluntary Aid Detachment No. 18, Brecknockshire
William Mayne, Acting Accountant in the War Office
David McCall, Outside Manager of Ayrshire Dockyard Company, Ltd.
George William Richardson McCammon, Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
Gerald Bernard McCormick, Royal Navy, Ordnance Store Department, Chatham
Maude McGavin, Acting Assistant to the Supervisor of Copying, Colonial Office
James McGowan, Scottish Surveyor of Taxes
Donald McBrayne McLachlan, Outdoor Hull Manager of Submarine Department, Messrs. Beardmore & Company
Maurice Paterson McLaren, Assistant Engineer, H.M. Office of Works
Esther Fanny McLean, Commandant, Voluntary Aid Detachment No. 154, County of London
Capt. John Reid McLean JP Divisional Commander, Metropolitan Special Constabulary
Matthew Adam McLean, Shop Superintendent, British Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Company, Ltd., Manchester
Norman McManus, Works Manager, Dundee National Shell Factory, Ministry of Munitions
Julia McMordie, President of St. John Voluntary Aid Detachments, Belfast
Alice Margaret Meadows, Superintendent, 606th Motor Transport Company, Army Service Corps
Walter Alfred Medorow, Air Department, Admiralty
William Melville MVO JP Military Intelligence Branch, War Office
Herbert Melville Smith, Manager, King's Norton Filling Factory and National Filling Factory, Abbey Wood, Ministry of Munitions
Charles Duncan Menzies, Donor of Lynehurst Auxiliary Hospital, West Linton, Peebleshire
Henry John Merriman, Research Department, Woolwich Arsenal
Edith Minna Metcalfe, Honorary Organising Relief Secretary, Chatham Naval Branch, Soldiers' and Sailors' Families Association[12]
John Methven, Assistant Secretary to the City of Dundee Branch, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
John Deeble Michell, Chief Architectural Adviser, War Office
Charles Michie, Representative of the Ministry of Pensions, North Scotland
Ella Morison Millar
Annie Miller, Commandant, The Highlands Auxiliary Hospital, Shortheath, Farnham, Surrey
John Edwin Mills, London and South-Western Railway
Richard Tudor Millward, Exchequer and Audit Department
George Milne, Assistant Shipyard Manager of Messrs. Hall, Russell & Company, Ltd.
John Ferguson Milne, Assistant Architect, 2nd Class, H.M. Office of Works
John Robertson Milne, Central Accounts, Finance Department, Ministry of Munitions
Herbert Samuel Mingard, Assistant Director, Contracts Section, Explosives Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
George Bennett Mitchell, Red Cross Transport Officer, Aberdeen
John Adamson Mitchell, Dockyard Manager, Scotts Shipbuilding and Engineering Company, Ltd., Greenock
Walter Mitchell, Engine Works Manager, Scotts Shipbuilding and Engineering Company, Ltd., Greenock
Alexander George Moffatt, Sectional Commander, Swansea Special Constabulary
Annie Maitland Moir, Lady Secretary for Scotland, Y.M.C.A.
Frederick William Moll, District Inspector of Stores Construction, Ministry of Munitions
Owen Monk, Prisoners of War Department, Foreign Office
William Dusar Monk, Q.M. of Lewisham Military Hospital
Olive Eleanor Monkhouse, Chief Woman Dilution Officer, Labour Department, Ministry of Munitions[12]
Eleanora Montford, Commandant and Matron, Broadway House Auxiliary Hospital, Church Stoke, Montgomeryshire
Isabella Macalister Montgomerie
John Morgan, Superintendent, Stoke-on-Trent Special Constabulary
Arthur Morson, Clerk to the Rugby Urban District Council; Clerk to the Rugby Urban Tribunal and to the Local Representative Committee
Lucy Aylwin Morten-Turner, Commandant, Lady's Close Auxiliary Hospital, Watford
Arthur Herbert Moseley, Secretary, Birmingham Munitions Board of Management
George Sinclair Moss, British Consular Assistant, Weihaiwei
Frank Jago Munford, Statistical Department, Ministry of National Service
Henry Palmer Murphy, Personal Assistant to Controller of Inspection, Ministry of Munitions
Jerome Bernard Murphy, Cunard Agent, Queenstown
James Robertson Murray, British Vice-Consul (Acting Consul), Colon
Maynard Mylrea, Lady Superintendent, Y.M.C.A., Sling Plantation, Salisbury Plain
Harold Walter Naish, Trench Warfare Finances, Finance Department, Ministry of Munitions
Ada Grace Neame, Commandant, Christchurch Auxiliary Hospital, Beckenham
James Henry Needham, Yard Manager, Messrs. Sir James Laing & Sons
William Nelson, Technical Adviser to Shipyard Labour Department, Admiralty
Alice Jane Winifred Nicholas, Chief Dairy Instructress, Cornwall County Council
Evelyn Joanna Nicholson, Q.M., Vernon Institute Auxiliary Hospital, Great Saughall, Chester
Capt. John Steel Nicholson, Technical Adviser, Materials and Accessories Branch, Air Board
John Strathdel Nicol, British Explosives Syndicate
Beatrice Norrie, Lady Superintendent, Giro's Club, and Y.M.C.A. Hostel, London Bridge
James Northam, Admiralty
George H. A. Northcott, Secretary in Charge, Eastern Counties Division, Y.M.C.A.
Leslie Richard Notley, Assistant, Printing Branch, Ministry of Munitions
Harry Augustus Nott, Electrical Department, H.M. Dockyard, Devonport
Reuben Oakeshott, Chief of Stores Branch, Woolwich Arsenal
Helen Leslie Ogilvie, Supervisor of Garments for NorthEastern District, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
James William Olive, Superintendent, Metropolitan Police
Arthur O'Reilly, Supervising Clerk, Honours Section of the Military Secretary's Department, War Office
John Maurice Orniston, Principal Assistant, Repair Department, Cammell Laird & Company
Sybil Margaret Orpen, Q.M., Kensington Division, County of London, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
C. J. Orton, Late Organiser of Shell Forging Distribution, Ministry of Munitions
Ethel Margaret Oswald Oswald, Head Masseuse, Almeric Paget Military Massage Corps
James Thomas Ottewill, Warship Manager in Shipbuilding Department, Fairfield Shipbuilding and Engineering Company, Ltd.
Eugenie Josephine Oudin, Superintendent, Translation Bureau, War Office
John Albert Owen, South-Eastern and Chatham Railway
Edward Page, Fishery Officer of the Sussex Local Sea Fisheries Committee
Sydney David Pallin, Superintendent of Refuge for Belgians at Edmonton
Horace Frank Palmer, Accountant-General's Department, Admiralty
May Blanche Palmer, Superintendent of Women Munition Workers Hostel, Slades Green
William George Pape, London, Brighton & South Coast Railway
George Herbert Parr, British Vice-Consul, Rio de Janeiro
Janie Ramsbottom Paul, in charge of Red Cross Working Parties in Dumbartonshire
Catherine Swan Paull, Commandant of St. Matthew's Hall Auxiliary Hospital, St. Mary's Road, Willesden
Janet Payne, Organiser and President of the Red Cross Ladies Workroom in Alexandria
Winifred Pead, Administrative Assistant, Contracts Branch, Air Board
Agnes Isobel Pearce, Voluntary Aid Detachment, New Zealand Expeditionary Force
Walter Peel JP Member of Liverpool Local Representative Committee
Howard Peet, Superintendent, Signalling Section, Grimsby Special Constabulary
Richard Gall Peirce, Accountant-General's Department, Admiralty
Henry William Pell, Assistant Engineer, Ministry of Munitions, No. 3 Area (Yorkshire)
Charlie Pelling, Shop Superintendent, Messrs. White, Allom & Company, London
George Henry Perry, Deputy Head Chemist, Inspection Department, Woolwich Arsenal
Bernard Richard Peters, Assistant Inspector of Gun Ammunition (Technical), Ministry of Munitions
Cecil James Razzell Peters, Assistant Director of Propellant Branch, Explosives Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Walter Bell Pettet, Released Soldiers Records, Labour Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
David Phillips, Works Manager, Messrs. Nevill Druce & Company, Llanelly
Henry Dixon Phillips JP Chairman, Eastern Counties Division, Y.M.C.A.
Henry Thomas Phillips, Trench Warfare Contracts, Contracts Department, Ministry of Munitions
James Falkner Phillips, Civil Assistant, Board of Invention and Research, Admiralty
John Henry Phillips, Personal Assistant to Controller, Labour Regulation Department, Ministry of Munitions
Walter John Phillips, Senior Examiner, Pay Office
Alice Mabel Pickering, Commandant of Arnold's Auxiliary Voluntary Aid Detachment Hospital, Doncaster
Henry Pilling, Messrs. Galloways Ltd.
The Reverend Arnold Theophilus Biddulph Pinchard, Secretary to the Birmingham Lord Mayor's Committee for Organising Hospitality for Refugees
Charles Pinkham JP Chairman, Willesden Local Tribunal
Arthur Piper, Acting Paymaster, Army Pay Department
Alfred John Button Pippard, Head of Sub-section in Technical Department of Air Board
Charles Russell Pledger, Aeronautics Finance, Finance Department, Ministry of Munitions
Amy Pomeroy, for executing a task requiring exceptional courage and self-sacrifice
Amy Porter, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Highbury, Birmingham
Francis Martin Potter, Superintendent, H.M. Factory, Penrhyndeudraeth, Ministry of Munitions
Edward Cecil Poultney, in charge, Machine Tool Section, American Branch, Ministry of Munitions
George Power, Secretary, Midland Leather Trades Federation
Vernon Hamilton Poynter, Honorary Secretary, Committee for Purchase of Army Camp Refuse
Maye Alice Pressley Smith, Shorthand Typist to His Majesty's Legation in Norway
Ernest Price, Supervisor, India Store Depot, India Office
Janet Price-Williams, Honorary Organising Secretary, Cardiff Women's Advisory Committee
Ernest Edward Prower, Travelling Inspector, Central Stores Department, Ministry of Munitions
Henry James Prytherch, Head of Military Office Staff, Great Eastern Railway
Frederick Hayden Purchas, District Stores Superintendent, Manchester, Ministry of Munitions
Henry James Quick, Electrical Department, H.M. Dockyard, Chatham
Joseph Rogers Quilter, Secretary to the Drapers Chamber of Trade
John Raddiffe, Representative of the Ministry of Pensions, South-West England
George William Rankin, Y.M.C.A. Building Secretary
John Arthur Rankin, Outside Manager of Engine and Boiler Works, Messrs. John Brown & Company, Ltd.
George Daniel Read, Officer in Charge of Admiralty Works, Ipswich, Shotley and Yarmouth Districts
Joseph William Reading, Clerk in Registrar-General's Department
Annie Bradley Readman, Secretary's Department, Admiralty
Maj. Charles Clements Reid, Honorary Secretary and Treasurer, Clackmannan and Kinross, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Isabella Elizabeth Reid, in charge of Red Cross Rest Room and Hostel at Aberdeen
Clement Unsworth Reynolds, Commandant and Transport Officer, Stockport Division, British Red Cross Society
William Howe Reynolds, Staff Officer, Chief Industrial Commissioner's Department
Capt. David Mackinlay Potter Roach, Production Officer, Engines Branch, Air Board
Percy Christopher Rice, Financial Department, Foreign Office
George Herbert Richardson, Inspector of Clothing, Royal Army Clothing Department
Peter Richardson, Member of Appeal Tribunal, Dumbarton
Alfred Charles James Rickett, Private Secretary to Controller, Controlled Establishments Branch, Ministry of Munitions
Graham Stanley Rider, Sub-Section Director, Inland Transport, Ministry of Munitions
Lewis Herbert Rider, Finance Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Patrick Riordan, Superintendent of Registry, Board of Agriculture
Arthur Henry Riseley, Honorary Secretary, Bristol Citizens Recruiting Committee
Sir James William Ritchie Bt Divisional Commander, Metropolitan Special Constabulary
Ernest Roberts, Manchester War Pensions Committee
Herbert Wallace Roberts, Chief Chemist, H.M. Factory, Qualferry, Ministry of Munitions
Robert Henry Robertshaw, Junior Clerk, Civil Service Commission
John Robertson, Lanarkshire Miners Union, Member of Collier Recruiting Court, Lanarkshire
James Constable Robertson JP Town Councillor of Dundee
Winifred Agnes Florence Robertson, Director of Statistics Department, Admiralty
George Lovely Robinson, Outside Manager, Messrs. Fletcher, Son & Fearnall
William Charles Robinson, Superintendent, Metropolitan Police
James Robson JP President of Durham Miners Association; Assessor to the Colliery Recruiting Court
George James Nicholas Rogers, Clerk, Local Government Board
Richard Hawke Rogers, Messrs. Smith & Sons, Ltd.
Thomas Edward Rogers, Outside Iron Manager, Messrs. Swan, Hunter & Wigham Richardson, Ltd.
William Romney, Agent in Charge of Folkestone Harbour, South-Eastern and Chatham Railway
James Francis Ronca, Board of Trade
Edith Rose, Secretary of Lord Mayor's Committee, Liverpool, for reception, care and maintenance of refugees
Jane Rossall, Commandant and Principal Founder, The Star Hills Auxiliary Hospital, Lytham
James MacKean Rowbotham, in charge of Shell Forging Section, Ministry of Munitions
Arthur Maynard Rowland, Chief Technical Assistant for Optical Machinery, Machine Tool Department, Ministry of Munitions
Mildred Rowley, Commandant, Voluntary Aid Detachment No. 42, Histon Auxiliary Hospital, Cambridgeshire
Henry George Rowlinson JP Forest of Dean Miners Association; Member of Colliery Recruiting Court, Forest of Dean
Harry James Roworth, Statistical Branch, Gun Ammunition Department, Ministry of Munitions
Arthur Albert Rowse, Late Head Trench Warfare Engineer, Ministry of Munitions, No. 4 Area Midlands
Thomas Wright Royle, London Confidential Assistant to Superintendent of the Line, Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway
Herbert Llewellyn Rutter FRCS Officer in Charge of Wounded Convoys, Northumberland
The Hon. Lockhart Matthew St. Clair CIE Divisional Commander, Metropolitan Special Constabulary
Ella Victoire Sandeman, Officer in Charge, The Crescent Auxiliary Hospital, Hayling Island
Walter Anthony Sargent, Midland Railway
Harold Eustace Satow, His Britannic Majesty's Consul, Larissa
Edward Saunders JP Mayor of Harwich; Chairman of the Harwich Food Control Committee and of the Local Representative Committee
George William Saunders, Ships Requisitioning Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Thomas Arthur Saunders, Clerk in Registrar-General's Department
Ernst Schiff, Manager of the Poland Street Refuge for Belgian Refugees and Member of the Jewish Refugee Committee
Hubert Arthur Secretan, Naval Sea Transport Branch, Ministry of Shipping
James Seddon, Commandant, Ashton-under-Lyne Special Constabulary
Walter Sexton, Organiser of Transport Service, Dublin, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Lettice Seymour, Commandant, Hill Crest Auxiliary Hospital, Coventry
Thomas George Shacklady, Messrs. Curtis & Harvey, Ltd.
Ethel Mary Reader Shakespear DSc Birmingham War Pensions Committee
Matthew Joseph Sheridan, Collector of Customs and Excise, Newcastle
Percy Thomas Shorey, Confidential Clerk, Home Office
Robert Siddle, Secretary, Amalgamated Society of Leather Workers
Herbert Sidebottom, Superintendent, Remount Service
Arthur Molyneux Sillar, Assistant Superintending Engineer, Ministry of Munitions, No. 7 Area (Metropolitan)
Percy Simmonds, Acting Paymaster, Army Pay Department
John Leonard Simpson, Messrs. A. Harper, Sons & Bean, Ltd.
George Greig Sinclair, Acting Civil Engineer, in charge of Works, Royal Naval Air Service, Central Depot, Cranwell
William Sacheverell Sitwell, Clerk to the Cornwall Appeal Tribunal and Secretary to the County Patriotic Fund
Edward John Skinner, Electrical Engineer, Fairfield Shipbuilding and Engineering Company
James Cameron Smail, Organiser of Trade Schools under the Education Committee of the London County Council; District Manager, Metropolitan Munitions Committee
Alexander Smith, Assistant Shipyard Manager, Messrs. Vickers, Ltd.
Albert Smith, Head Master of the Westville Road Council School, Hammersmith
Clarence Dalrymple Smith
Frank William Smith, Head of Military Traffic Department, Great Central Railway
Gladys Augusta Smith, Private Secretary to Acting Chief of British War Mission in U.S.A.
Harold Smith, Shop Superintendent, Messrs. Mather & Platt, Ltd., Manchester
Harold Robert Smith, Honorary Secretary, Suffolk Auxiliary Hospital, Ampton Hall, Bury St. Edmunds
James Alfred Smith, Staff Clerk, Colonial Office
Rodney Smith, Y.M.C.A. Worker
Sydney Smith, Assistant Engineer, Ministry of Munitions, No. 4 Area (Midlands)
Francis Watson Smyth, Acting Paymaster, Army Pay Department
John Snell, Inspector, Horticultural Branch, Board of Agriculture
Frederick Cousins Snowden, Q.M. of the Hammersmith Military Hospital
John Sommerville, Senior Bond Officer, Shepherd's Bush, Ministry of Munitions
Wilfrid Guy Spear, Private Secretary to the Accountant-General of the Navy
Edward Francis Spiller, in charge, Registry and Accommodation, Ministry of Munitions, Grand Hotel, etc.
Edward Tom Springate, Traffic Agent, Newhaven, London, Brighton and South Coast Railway
Samuel Springer, Head of the General Department, Foreign Trade Department
Joseph Cooper Squirrell, Chief of Emergency Division, Ipswich Special Constabulary
Fanny Stacey, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Bishop's Stortford
John Stafford, Class A Clerk, War Office
James William Stafford, Passport Department, Foreign Office
Louis Donald Stansfield, Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
The Reverend Richard Staple, Chief Officer, Canterbury Special Constabulary
William Edgar Stephens, Town Clerk, Great Yarmouth; Clerk to the Great Yarmouth Local Tribunal
Herbert Given Stevenson, Representative of the Ministry of Pensions, North Ireland
Elizabeth Woodhead Stewart, Voluntary Aid Detachment, New Zealand Expeditionary Force
Carruthers Jean Stewart, Organising Secretary for the North of England, Munition Workers Welfare Committee, Y.W.C.A.
John Stewart, Secretary, West Perthshire District Food Production Committee
Robert Stewart, Postmaster, Margate
Ernest Henry Stall, Messrs. W. W. Still & Sons, Ltd.
Richard Albert Stokes, Manager, Morecambe National Filling Factory, Ministry of Munitions[12]
Ethel Mary Hutton Storey, County Secretary, Voluntary Aid Detachments, County of Durham
John Storey FRAS First Assistant Astronomer, Royal Observatory, Scotland; now serving in the Department of the Director of Naval Ordnance, Admiralty
Irene Strevens, Chief Superintendent of Women Clerks in Casualty Section, War Office
Ernest Edward Stringer, Registrar of the Foreign Trade Department
John Stubbs, Principal, Hughes-Stubbs Metal Company, Birmingham
Ellen Elizabeth Stuckey, Voluntary Aid Detachment, New Zealand Expeditionary Force
Harold Sumner, Assistant County Director, East Lancashire, British Red Cross Society
Capt. Lewis George Sydenham, Ministry of National Service
Mary Louisa Sykes, Organiser and Donor, Auxiliary Hospital, Cross Hawell, Rossett, Denbighshire
Percy Duncan Sykes, Contract Department, Admiralty
Percy James Symmons, in charge of Movement of Materials, Central Stores Department, Ministry of Munitions
Charles Crump Tancock, Superintendent, Docks Station, Southampton
John Reuben Tapp, Acting Victualling Store Officer, Aberdeen
Grace Rosina Tasker, in charge of Clothing Depot for Stirlingshire, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Mary Beatrice Churchill Tayler, Clerk, Intelligence Branch, Procurator-General's Department
Alice Maud Rowson Taylor, Commandant, Windy Knowe Auxiliary Hospital, Blundellsands, West Lancashire
Arthur Thomas Taylor, Assistant Principal Officer, Sugar Distribution Branch, Ministry of Food
Charles Taylor, Accountant-General's Department, Admiralty
Esther Hilda Taylor, Private Secretary to the Secretary of the Ministry of National Service
George Wilson Taylor, Clerk to the Central (Unemployed) Body, for London; Clerk to the London Appeal Tribunal and Special Tribunal
Percy Taylor, Chief Examiner, War Office
Charles Temperley, Commander and Transport Officer, Metropolitan Special Constabulary
Dorothy Mary Gladys Temperley, Assistant, Historical Section, Requirements and Statistics Department, Ministry of Munitions
Charlton Thew, Works Manager, Messrs. Hawthorn, Leslie & Company
Arthur Augustus Thomas, Military Representative, Holloway Tribunal
Olive Morton Thomas, Private Secretary to the Chairman of the War Trade Intelligence Department
George Thompson, Managing Director, Messrs. H. W. Ward & Company, Ltd., Birmingham
Adam Robert Thomson, First Division Clerk, Railway Department, Board of Trade
Archibald Thomson, Outside Manager of Messrs. William Hamilton & Company, Ltd.
Margaret Eleanor Thomson, Commander in Charge, Auxiliary Hospital, Penrith
John Samuel Alphonso McCoan Thornhill, Chief Superintendent of the Map Printing Department of the Ordnance Survey of the United Kingdom
Reginald Ernest Thornley, Assistant Principal Officer, Establishment Section, Ministry of Food
Hannah Maud Taylor Thorpe, Commandant, Voluntary Aid Detachment No. 42, Nottinghamshire
Hugh Kingsmill Neville Thurston, Commander, Plymouth Special Constabulary
Hugh Gorham Ticehurst, Thames Ammunition Works, Erith
Violet Beatrice Till, Commandant and Organiser of Nurses Hostel, Surrey
Henry Tom, British Vice-Consul, Rotterdam
Marion Tomkinson, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, The Larches, Kidderminster
John Tourtel, Assistant Inspector of Munitions, U.S.A.
Arthur Henry Towle, First Class Surveyor of Taxes, Inland Revenue
Lucy Mabel Townsend, in charge of Hospital Surgical Supply Depot, Scottish Branch, British Red Cross Society
Anna Townshend, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, The Hermitage, Solihull
Edward John Tozer, Chief Registrar, Controller's Department, Admiralty
Gwendoline Chenevix-Trench, Administrator, Fenrhyn Cottage Auxiliary Hospital, Carnarvonshire
Rosamond, Baroness Trevor, Donor and Organiser, Brynkinalt Auxiliary Hospital, Chirk, Denbighshire
William Burrows Trick JP Chairman, Neath Rural District Council; Chairman, Neath Rural Local Tribunal
Oliver Trigger, Deputy Head Chemist, Inspection Department, Woolwich Arsenal
Harry Woodward Trotter, Committee Clerk, Customs and Excise
Ada Mary Turner, Superintendent of Women Munition Workers Club, Gravesend
Maj. George Bankart Turner, Engineer in Charge of Production, Royal Aircraft Factory
Helen Turner, Matron of the Central Work Rooms, Royal Academy
William Henry Turton, Manager, Gun and Carriage Factories, Woolwich Arsenal
James Tweedale, Works Manager, Messrs. T. Robinson & Sons, Ltd., Railway Works, Rochdale
Walter Gerald Vann, Secretary of the British Farmers Fund
George Vardy, Engine Works Manager, Messrs. Swan, Hunter & Wigham Richardson, Ltd., Wallsend-on-Tyne
John Varley, Chief Investigator, Machine Tool Department, Ministry of Munitions
Arthur Ronald Vaughan, Assistant to Engineering Manager, Messrs. Cammell Laird and Company, Ltd.
Ruth Sarah Vigers, Assistant Secretary, Officers (Convalescent Homes Department, British Red Cross and Order of St. John
Harold Decimus Vigor, Secretary, Royal Commission on Wheat Supplies
Albert William Viney, Shop Manager, Royal Naval Torpedo Factory, Greenock
Nancy Lycett, Baroness Vivian, Lady Superintendent, Y.M.C.A. Hut, Euston
Francis Richard Wade, Assistant Inspector of Gun Ammunition (Supervisory), Ministry of Munitions
Edward Waggott, Sir W. G. Armstrong, Whitworth & Company, Ltd.
Col. Charles Richard Wainwright TD DL JP Chairman, Ashton-under-Lyne Local Tribunal
Alice May Waite, Private Secretary to Controller, Optical Munitions, Glassware and Potash Production, Ministry of Munitions
Alexander Mann Walker, Divisional Commander, West Riding Special Constabulary
Charles Edmund Walker, Messrs. J. Stone and Company
John Drummond Walker, Naval Sea Transport Branch, Ministry of Shipping
John Frederick Walker, Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
Maria Edith Walker, Commandant, Voluntary Aid Detachment No. 24, Auxiliary Hospital, Spilsby, Lincolnshire
Robert Walker, Late Private Secretary to Director-General of Inspection of Munitions
Augusta Maud Wallace
Robert Wallis, Works Manager, Wallsend Slipway and Engineering Company
John Thomas Walton, Shop Superintendent, Woolsey Sheep Shearing Machine Company, Limited, Birmingham
Caroline Theodora Ward, Commandant of Burntwood Auxiliary Hospital, Caterham
Charles Wardle, Secretary of the Nottingham Lace Workers Union
Percy Thomas Wardle, Secretary, Messrs. William Muir and Co., Ltd., Manchester
Arthur Glyn Watkins, Manager, Gloucester Filling Factory, Ministry of Munitions
Thomas Percival Holmes Watkins, Clerk to the Guardians, Pontypool; Clerk to the Panteg Local Tribunal
Isabella Clark Watson, Voluntary Aid Detachment, New Zealand Expeditionary Force
William George Watson, Constructive Department, Pembroke Dock
Henry Charles Watts, Head of Sub-Section of Air Board, Technical Department
Adam Weatherhead, Superintendent, Middlesbrough Special Constabulary
Ella Gertrude Amy Webb MD Lady District Superintendent, St. John Ambulance Brigade, Dublin
Ellen, Lady Webb, Donor and Commandant, Llwynarthan Auxiliary Hospital, Castleton, Cardiff
Herbert Stephen Webb, Naval Store Department, Admiralty
Walter Weighell, Contraband Department Registry
George Jackson Weir, Factory Accounts, Finance Department, Ministry of Munitions
Cecile Campbell Welsh
James Hales West, Superintendent, Metropolitan Police
John Lowe Westland, Surveyor, Director of Works Department, Admiralty
Edith Ivy Weston
Thomas Angas Wheatley, Messrs. Beck & Company
Alfred James Whitby, Staff Clerk, Finance Division, H.M. Office of Works
Arthur White, Superintendent, Metropolitan Police
Jesse Obadiah White, Constructive Department, H.M. Dockyard, Chatham
Percy Ernest White, Senior Officer, Portsmouth Special Constabulary
Professor Robert George White MSc Technical Adviser, Food Production Department
Gerald Whiting, Yard Manager, Messrs. Sir W. G. Armstrong, Whitworth & Company, Ltd.
George Jackson Whitten, Surveyor (Permanent), War Office
Lt.-Col. Herbert John Whittle, Ministry of National Service
Christopher Henry George Wilkinson, Naval Store Department, Admiralty
Charles Robert Thomas Williams, Late Assistant Director, Enrolled Labour Section, Labour Supply Department, Ministry of Munitions
Ernest Graham Williams, Naval Sea Transport Branch, Ministry of Shipping
Isabel Rose Williams, Lady Superintendent, Y.M.C.A. Hut, Waterloo Road
Elizabeth Williams Wynn, County Secretary, Denbigh and Flintshire, British Red Cross and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Rose Willson, Donor and late Commandant of Ranceby Ball Auxiliary Hospital, Grantham
Harry Gouldie Wilson Accountant-General's Department, Admiralty
William Wilson, Outside Manager, Northumberland Shipbuilding Company
Rowland Winn, Tractor Representative for Yorkshire, Food Production Department
Henry Elsbury Winter, Sergeant, Carlisle Special Constabulary
Constance Evelyn Winwood Smith, Personal Assistant to Director of Supply and Production, Air Board
Percy Furlong Wise, Inspector of Gun Ammunition (Supervisory), Ministry of Munitions
Ralph Wolfenden, Assistant, National Physical Laboratory
Frances Mary Wood, Contracts Branch, War Office
Lt. Thomas Wood, in charge of Red Cross Motor Repair Works, Boulogne
Charles Merllynn Woodford, Organiser of the War Trade Department Registry
Amy Wood-Hill, Commandant, Auxiliary Hospital, Beccles, Suffolk
Charlie Roland Woods, Secretary of the Horse Rationing Committee and of the Board of Trade Iron and Steel Committee
Irene Woodyear, Military Intelligence Branch, War Office
Frank George Woollard, Technical Director of Messrs. E. G. Wrigley & Company, Ltd., Birmingham
Andrew Charles Woolmer, Superintendent, H.M. Factory, Swindon, Ministry of Munitions
Walter John Wotton, Electrical Department, H.M. Dockyard, Devonport
Henry Wright, First Class Surveyor of Taxes, Inland Revenue
Professor Mark Robinson Wright, Chairman of Whitley and Monkseaton Local Tribunal
William Wright, Engineer to the Trustees of the Crystal Palace
William Wright, Y.M.C.A., Secretary for Ireland
Leonard Graveney Wykes, Secretary, Machine Tool Advisory Committee, Ministry of Munitions
Nora Wynne, Welfare Worker and Head of Munition Workers Hostel, Luton
David Wilberforce-Young, Inspector, Forestry Branch, Board of Agriculture
Edward Willie Young, Honorary Secretary and Organiser, County of Middlesex, British Red Cross Society
George Young, Inspector, Cardiff Special Constabulary
Patricia Young
Thomas Young, Executive Officer for Food Production, County of Fife
Walter Youngman, Freight of Stores Section, Ministry of Shipping
For services in connection with the War in France, Egypt and Salonika 

Capt. Nevill Anderson, Deputy Assistant Adjutant-General, British Expeditionary Force
Madeleine Beasley, Organiser and Controller of a Canteen, British Expeditionary Force
Arthur Beeby-Thompson, in charge of Deep Well Boring Park, British Salonika Force
The Hon. Phyllis Hermione Coke, in charge of Young Men's Christian Association arrangements at 3rd Army Rest Camp
James Lawrence Hay, Secretary, Young Men's Christian Association, New Zealand Division
Verania MacPhillamy, Assistant Superintendent of the Soldiers' Club and Rest Camp, Kantara Railway Station, Egypt
William Owens, Supervising Field Secretary, Young Men's Christian Association, Egyptian Expeditionary Force
John William Swithen-bank, Young Men's Christian Association XVIII Corps, British Expeditionary Force
British India
Lilian Barton
Deaconess Margaret Durell, lately in charge Soldiers Home, Peshawar and Cherat
Kate Thubron
May McCarthy
Edith Spencer, Nursing Sister, His Highness the Maharaja Somalia's Convalescent Home, Nairobi, East Africa
Florence Maria Wyld, Principal of the Mahbubia Girls School, Hyderabad
Herbert Ruben Bird, Manager, Office of Military Secretary to His Excellency the Governor of Madras
Rao Bahadur Rango Govind Naik, Pleader, Bombay
Lt. Charles Edward Miller Judge, Indian Army Reserve of Officers, Supply and Transport Corps, Army Headquarters
Frank Henry Jones, First Engineer of the Cable Steamer Patrick Stewart
Commonwealth of Australia
Albert Sydney Austin, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Hugh V. E. Calthrop, for services oversea in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Bed Cross Society
H. C. Cave, for services oversea in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Ida Florence Dean, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Frank De Boise, for services oversea in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Thomas Percy Draper, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Kate Egan, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
E. G. Elworthy, for services oversea in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
W. J. Isbister, for services oversea in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Ethel Laidley, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
W. T. Robertson, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Capt. Robert Albert Dunbar Sinclair, for services oversea in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Lillias Margaret Skene, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Nancy Consett Stephen, for services in Australia in connection with the Australian Branch of the British Red Cross Society
Charles A. de Messurier Walker, Honorary Secretary, Australian Comforts Fund
Egypt and the Sudan
Pye Moore, Nursing Sister, Khartoum Civilian Hospital
Edward Oliver Heywood Fulford, Works Manager, Blue Nile Irrigation
John Ball DSc Chief Inspector of Geological Survey
Allen Calder Potts, Works Manager, Sudan Steamers Department
Sydney Dennett, Superintending Engineer, Sudan Posts and Telegraphs Department
John McIntosh, Works Manager, Locomotive Shops, Egyptian State Railways
George Douglas, Superintendent, Photographic Office, Survey Department
Herbert Mason, Inspector in Veterinary Service of Ministry of Agriculture
Burton Pearson, Divisional Traffic Superintendent, Egyptian State Railways
George Burnett Middleton, Mechanical Service, Public Works Department
Henry Wilfrid Skelly, Works Manager, Government Press
Percy Weaver, Assistant Divisional Traffic Superintendent
George Boxall, Dockyard Engineer, Port Sudan
Dominion of New Zealand
Emma Bissland
Ann Burgess
Jean Burt
Sarah Ann Coradine
Harriette Sophia Crawford
George Lester Donaldson
John William Ellis
Edith Fenton
Elizabeth Forrester
Hope Gibbons
Florence Guinness
Margaret Harding
Leah Lucy Hawke
Douglas William Jack
Mary Hawkins Kirkpatrick
Victor John Larner
Kate Rose Leaver
Edward George Levinge
Isabel McLean
Arthur Edward Manning
Col. William Henry Sefton Moorhouse, Dominion Secretary of the New Zealand Branch of the British Red Cross Society and Order of St. John of Jerusalem
Elizabeth Lily Nash
Arihia Kane Ngata
George Albert Perry
Herbert James Duncan Robertson
Iris Brenda Rolleston
Alice Georgina Sherratt
Jean Simpson
William Wallace Snodgraes
Belle Spedding
William Stead
Maurice Thompson
Patricia Clay Thomson
Charles John Treleaven
Arthur Varney, General Secretary, Young Men's Christian Association, New Zealand
Georgina Webster
Newfoundland
William Walker Blackall BA a Superintendent of Education, for services in connection with recruiting
Vincent Patrick Burke MA LLD a Superintendent of Education, for services in connection with recruiting
The Reverend Levi Curtis MA DD a Superintendent of Education, for services in connection with recruiting
Elizabeth Selina Green, for services in connection with the Newfoundland War Contingent Association
Annie Hayward, for services in connection with the Women's Patriotic Association
Mary McKay, for services in connection with the Women's Patriotic Association
Eliza Mary Jane Morris, for services in connection with the Newfoundland War Contingent Association
Frank Steer, Honorary Secretary of the Imperial Red Cross Fund in Newfoundland
Union of South Africa
Ezra John Barnett, for services in connection with the South African Railways Rest Room, Johannesburg
Lucy Dorothea Bourne, of Red Cross and Comforts Committees, Pretoria
William Beale Calder, for services in connection with the Governor-General's Fund, Durban
Herbert Ernest Clark, Honorary Secretary, Kimberley Committee, GovernorGeneral's Fund
Francis George Clarkson, Honorary Secretary, Grahamstown Committee, Governor-General's Fund
Paul Dietrich Cluver, Mayor of Stellenbosch
John Dougall, Honorary Treasurer, Governor-General's Fund
Robert Dunlop, af the Natal Branch of the Governor-General's Fund
Eveline Mary Duquemin, for services in connection with the Governor-General's Fund
John Fairlbairn, Joint Honorary Secretary, Bed Cross, South Africa
Pieter Jacobus van Breda Faure, ex-Mayor of Bloemfontein
Laura Vivienne Fraser, of the Comforts Committee, De Aar
Grace Christian Friedlander, President and Hon. Secretary of the South African Work Booms, London
Constantino William Giovanetti, Mayor of Pretoria
Alexander Forsyth Girdwood, Port Goods Superintendent, Cape Town
Willoughiby How, Honorary Secretary, Port Elizabeth Local Committee of the Governor-General's Fund
Edwin Gilbert Izod, South African War Market Committee, Johannesburg
John Chambers Jemsley, Mayor of Port Elizabeth
Elizabeth Evelyn Martin, of the Red Cross Committee, Cape Town
Justina Wilhelrnina Nancy Moller, of the Comforts Committee, Johannesburg
Susan Ann Murray, of the Red Cross Committee, Bloemfontein
Maria Nuttall, for services in connection with the Governor-General's Fund, Durban
John Orr, Mayor of Kimberley
Mary Jeannette Parker, of the Women's Patriotic League, Pietermaritzburg
Thomas Samuel Parkyns, for war services on the railways of the South-West Africa Protectorate
Catherine Mary Bees, Member of War Work Committees, East London
Frederick Rowland, Joint Honorary Secretary, Red Cross, South Africa
Emma Jane Searle, of the Red Cross Committee, Cape Town
Thomas Sleith, General Manager, Union Defence Forces Institute
Ridhard Walter Stowe, for war services in the South African Railway Workshops, Cape Town
Percy Henry Taylor, Mayor of Pietermaritzburg
Arthur Walter Townshend, Chairman, Visiting Troops Entertainment Committee, Cape Town
Kate Amy van der Bijl, of the Red Cross and Comforts Committees, Cape Town
Rose Lilian Vintcent, of the South African Comforts Committee, London
John Henry Weaver, Chief Censor for the Union of South Africa
Charles Winser, Honorary Secretary, Natal Red Cross
Crown Colonies, Protectorates, etc.
Lt.-Col. Edward Bell, Chief Inspector of Police and Commandant of Local Forces, Leeward Islands
Marie Bouavia, for services to the sick, wounded and poor in Malta
Ellen Bowen, for services to War Charities in Barbados
Ada Ellen Briscoe, local representative in Jamaica of Queen Mary's Needlework Guild
Robert Randal Bruce, Receiver-General, Harbour Master and Shipping Master, Saint Helena
John Borlase Cassels, for Red Cross Services in British Guiana
Harry Hardman Cannell, Honorary Secretary, The Oversea Forces Reception Committee
Marie Clumeck, for services to War Charities in the Straits Settlements
Frederick Appleton Collymore, for services in connection with the Red Cross Motor Ambulance Fund, Barbados
Katharine Cook, Matron, Church Missionary Society Hospital, Kampala, Uganda Protectorate
Emanuel Henry Cummings, Mayor of Freetown, Sierra Leone
Judith de Cordova, for services in connection with War Charities and recruiting in Jamaica
Annie Jane Douglas, Matron of the Government Lunatic Asylum, Kingston, Jamaica, for services on behalf of War Charities and recruiting
Christopher Robert Burroughs Draper, Magistrate and District Commissioner, Northern Rhodesia
Matthew McKean Fitzpatrick, Senior Engineer, Marine Department, Nigeria, for services in connection with the salvage of vessels at Duala
Harry Kaye Cecil Fisher, of the Eastern Extension, Australasia and China Telegraph Company, for services to the Government of the Straits Settlements
Capt. Percy Louis Alexander Fraser, Superintendent of Prisons, Trinidad
Maj. John Morton Fremantle, Resident of Muri, Nigeria, for services in connection with the Cameroon Campaign
Edward Basil Herbert Goodall, Native Commissioner, Northern Rhodesia
Eugene Patrick Griffin, Chief Clerk, Colonial Secretary's Office, Gibraltar
John Pierce Hand, Organiser of the "600" Club in aid of returned soldiers, Bermuda Islands
Robert Oliphant Hutchison, Superintendent of Imports and Exports, Colony of Hong Kong
Agnes Norah Johnson, Honorary Secretary of the Bahamian Red Cross Guild
Edgar Anderson Averaye Jones, Magistrate and District Commissioner, Northern Rhodesia
Tereza Mary Kearney, Mother Superior, Mill Hill Mission, Uganda Protectorate
Vrasidas Demitriou Lanitis, Senior Clerk, District Administration, Cyprus
Lee Choon Guan, for services to War charities in the Straits Settlements
Elizabeth Ann Lofthouse, for services to War charities in the Bahama Islands
George Graham Percy Lyons, Magistrate and District Commissioner, Northern Rhodesia
Anne Gill Mifsud, Lady Superintendent of the Nursing Division of the St. John's Ambulance Brigade, Malta
Mary Moseley, Honorary Secretary of the Ladies' Committee in London for the British West Indies Regiment
Walter Frederick Nutt, of the Straits Trading Company, for services in the Federated Malay States
Henry Bradshaw Popham, District Political Officer in the British Sphere of Occupation in Togoland
Robert Sutherland Rattray, District Political Officer in the British Sphere of Occupation in Togoland
Maria Jean Reid, Chairman of the Red Cross Committee, Nyasaland
Arthur Thomas Rivers, Honorary Treasurer of the Oversea Forces Reception Committee
Herbert St. John Sheppard, Senior Assistant Auditor, Nigeria, for services in connection with the Cameroon Campaign
Capt. William Blakeney Stanley, First Class District Commissioner, Sierra Leone
John James Toogood, Member of the Claims Board; East Africa Protectorate
Capt. Frederic Thomas George Tremlett, Deputy Inspector-General of Police, Mauritius
Ada Mary Tucker, for services to the Bermuda Contingents
Archibald Rhys Usher, Member of the Legislative Council of the Colony of British Honduras and Chairman of the British Honduras Contingent Society
Gustavus William Webster, Resident of Yola, Nigeria, for services in connection with the Cameroon Campaign
Capt. Charles Edward Wells, Chairman of the Rhodesia Employment Bureau for returned soldiers
Thomas Alfred Wood, Member of the Claims Board, East Africa Protectorate
Honorary Members
Sir Apolo Kagwa KCMG Prime Minister of Buganda
Edward Sulemani Kahaya, King of Ankole; Andereya Juhaga, King of Bunyoru; and Dandi Kasagama, King of Toro; For services in raising and organising native levies and local Defence Corps, Uganda Protectorate
Sayyid Ahmed el Morghani, Notable of Kassala
El Sherif Yusef El Hindi, Notable
Yacbub Bey Fahmy, Station Superintendent, Cairo Station
Attilio Nani, Postmaster, Port Said
Ibraham Bey Dimitri, Sudan Service
Royal Red Cross[edit]
First Class (RRC)[edit]
Millicent Acton, Matron, Territorial Force Nursing Service (T.F.N.S.)
Margaret Anderson, Head Sister, Australian Army Nursing Service
Edith Elizabeth Appleton, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, St. Bartholomew's
Ellen Elizabeth Baldrey, Sister, Queen Alexandra's Imperial Military Nursing Service Reserve (Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.)
Marian Winfield Bannister, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Frederickke Wilhelmina Christopherson, Assistant Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Mary Constance Clark, Superintending Sister, Queen Alexandra's Royal Naval Nursing Service (Q.A.R.N.N.S.)
Grace Corder, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Helen Cousins, Matron, 10, Palace Green, W. London
Elizabeth Joan Cumming, Matron, Army Nursing Service Reserve
Nora Dalrymple, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Ethel Sarah Davidson, Matron, Army Auxiliary Nursing Service
Annie Blackley Denton, Acting Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Helen Dey, Acting Sister, Queen Alexandra's Imperial Military Nursing Service (Q.A.I.M.N.S.)
Clarice Molyneux Dickson, Sister, Army Auxiliary Nursing Service
Maud Alice Dunn, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Nora Easby, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, St. Thomas Hospital
Lily Agnes Ephgrave, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S. (retired)
Gertrude Annie Flood, Matron, Military Orthopaedic Hospital, Shepherd's Bush
Mary. Gladys Connie Foley, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Dorothy Penrose Foster, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Myra Goodeve, Matron, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Frances Mary Hall, Acting Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S. (retired)
Jane Anne Hannah, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Elsie Emma Harlow, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Ethel Harwood, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Katie Payne Hodge, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R., Australia
Minnie Holmes, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Ethel Julia Marion Keene, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Estelle Venner Keogh, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R., Australia
Mary Walker Langlands, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Dorothy Ann Laughton, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Gertiude Lulham, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Margaret Joan Leonara Lyons, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Elizabeth Lusk Macaulay, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Edinburgh Mental Hospital
Cordelia MacKay, Acting Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Janet McGregor McDonald, Nursing Sister, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Katherine Violet Saile Merriman, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Isabel Muirhead Muir, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Gertrude Napper, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Alice Nye, Matron, Nursing Service
Ida O'Dwyer, Head Sister, Army Auxiliary Nursing Service
Mildred Alice Oakley, Sister, Acting Matron, T.F.N.S.
Elizabeth Orr, Assistant Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Rachel Patterson, Matron, Nyasaland Nursing Service
Kathleen Agnes Prendergast, Acting Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Minnie Farquharson Proctor, Sister, Army Auxiliary Nursing Service
Elizabeth Rogers, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Violet Rogers, Sister, T.F.N.S. Alice Rowe, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Amelia Julia, Lady Sargant ARRC Commandant and Matron, St. Anselm's Hospital, Walmer
Eva Owen Schofield, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Edinburgh Royal Infirmary
Helen Donaldson Shearer, Nursing Sister, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Margaret Helen Smyth, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Alice Violet Stewart, Senior Nursing Sister, Nursing Service
Louisa Stobo, Head Sister, Army Auxiliary Nursing Service
Marky Minto Tait, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Glasgow Western Infirmary
Jean Urquhart, Matron, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Margaret Whitson, Matron, British Red Cross Society
Maude Willes ARRC Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Eva Florence Wilson, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Nella Myrtle Wilson, Assistant Matron, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Adelaide Anne Wood, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Second Class (ARRC)[edit]
Maud Alice Abraham, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Middlesex Hospital
Louisa Joyce Acton, Town Hall Hospital, Torquay
Helen Addison, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Betty Angel, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Royal Free Hospital
Esther Lydia Ashby, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Ellen Atkinson, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Alfreeda Jean Attrill, Nursing Sister, Canadian Nursing Service
Frances Ethel Bach, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, David Lewis Hospital, Liverpool
Annie Baillie, Nursing Sister, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Geraldine Catherine Ball, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Annie Barns, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, London Hospital
Florence Marion Bartleet, Acting Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Francis Ethel Barwell, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Henrietta Bauman, Sister, South African Medical Nursing Service
Susan Baxter, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Mile End Infirmary
Mary du Caurroy, The Duchess of Bedford, Woburn Auxiliary Hospital, Bedford
Beatrice Emily Beeson, Special Probationers Nursing Service
Louisa Bennett, Sister, British Red Cross Society
Marianne Ballingall Bennett, Assistant Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Mother Mary Berckmans, Matron, Military Hospital, Waterloo Park, Lancashire
Louisa Harriett Berry, Staff Nurse, T.F.N.S.
Elizabeth May Best, Nursing Sister, Canadian Army Medical Corps, Nursing Service
Florence Ethel Bickmore, Sister, British Red Cross Society
Frances May Billington, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R., New Zealand
Annie Blackburn, Staff Nurse, T.F.N.S.
Ada Blackmail, London Hospital
Emily Coleclough Blake, Nursing Sister, South African Medical Nursing Service
Elsie Blest, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Constance Boschoff, Staff Nurse, Clandon Park, Guildford
Emily Caroline Clifford Bramwell, Matron, The Red House Auxiliary Hospital, Leatherhead
Margaret Allen Brander, Sister, T.F.N.S.
May Gertrude Broadbent, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Katharine Alice Broade, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S. (retired)
Flora McDonald Browning, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Royal Infirmary, Sunderland
Mabel Emma Bruce, Nursing Sister, Canadian Army Medical Corps, Nursing Service
Amy Ada Bryant, Matron, Benfleet Hall Auxiliary Hospital, Sutton
Mathilde Bull, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Marguerite Eveline Bunyard, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Ellen Josephine Burke, Staff Nurse, Civil Hospital Reserve, Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast
Georgia Burke-Roche, Sister, Nursing Service
Helen Caig, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Queens Hospital, Birmingham
Nina Cairns, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Alexine Cameron, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Edith Clare Cameron, Sister, Army Auxiliary Nursing Service
Helen Margaret Cameron, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Eve Mary Campbell, The Hon. Nursing Sister, East Africa Nursing Service
Mary Roslyn Carr, Matron, British Red Cross Society
Edith Emma Dorothy Carter, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Stella Caulfield, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Kathleen Cawler, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Sarah E. Chadwick, Sister, St. Johns Hospital, Southport
Lily Langshaw Chapman, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Julie Mary Clancy, Staff Nurse, Civil Hospital Reserve, London Hospital
Marguerite Grard-Clment, Sister (late A.N.S.), Military Hospital, Newcastle-on-Tyne
Mary Fynes Clinton, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Lynda Mary Coates, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital
Jessie Alexander Connal, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Isabel Connor, Nursing Sister, Australian Army Medical Corps, Nursing Service
Ianthe Constantinides, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Edith Marie Cooper, Acting Sister. Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Amy Isabel Coward, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Margaret Rosetta Cox, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Isobella Craig, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Glasgow Royal Infirmary
Mary Craig, Staff Nurse, South African Medical Nursing Service
Helen Patterson Crawford, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Mary Matthewson Crichton, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Manchester Royal Infirmary
Annie Crooks, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, London Hospital
Jean P. Cullen, Nursing Sister, Queen Alexandra's Royal Naval Nursing Service Reserve (Q.A.R.N.N.S.R.)
Ethel Mary Cumberledge, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, St. Bartholomew's
Agnes Elizabeth Cummings, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Constance Cundell, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Mary Curran, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Royal City of Dublin Hospital
Elsie Frances Curtis, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Clare Daglish, Voluntary Aid Detachment
May Dale, Nursing Sister, East Africa Nursing Service
Henrietta Daly, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, London Hospital
Marianne Emaline Dann, Matron, Red Cross Hospital, Hillfield, Reigate
Christina Anderson Davidson, Staff Nurse, T.F.N.S.
Mary Anne Davies, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Isabel May Day, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Alma Margaret Mary Denny, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Christina McI. Dewar, Nursing Sister, Q.A.R.N.N.S.R.
Gertrude Marion Doherty, Staff Nurse, Army Auxiliary Nursing Service
Edith Victoria Donaldson, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R., Australia
Helen Louise Drinkwater, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Mary Annie Earp, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Alice Mary Eastes, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Mary Richmond Easton, Matron, Headquarters, London
Mary Eksteen, Staff Nurse, South African Medical Nursing Service
Christabel Mary Ellis, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Mary Emerson, Sister, Hildens Military Hospital, Haslemere
Bessie Ernest, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Eliza Ann Everett, Nurse, Regents Park Hospital, Southampton
Margaret Fanny Fell, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Helen Mary Fergusson, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Charlotte Fitzmayer, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S. (T)
Nora Fitzpatrick, Nurse (Nursing Services), Dublin
May Armstrong Fletcher, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Jean Forbes, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Ella Foskett, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Helen Leila Fox, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Winifred Heath Fray, Nursing Sister, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Jessica Lillington Freshfield, Sister, British Red Cross Society
Kleo Friend, Commandant, The Castle Auxiliary Hospital, Ryde, Isle of Wight
Mary Furdham, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Jean Fyfe, Asst Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Margaret Mary Galbraith, Asst Matron, Canadian Army Medical Corps, Nursing Service
Margaret Gall, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Elsie Vera Orby Gascoigne, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, St. Bartholomew's Hospital
Mabel Emily Gascoine, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, West Hertfordshire Hospital
Elsie Georgina Gawith, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Kathleen Gawler, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Janet Elizabeth Giles, Matron, British Red Cross Society
Charlotte Mary Gooding, Sister, Kingston, Surbiton and District Red Cross Hospital, New Maiden
Katherine Marsh Gordon, Voluntary Aid Detachment Member
Edith Mary Goss, Lady Superintendent, Palace Auxiliary Hospital, Gloucester
Jemima Helen Grant, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Dora Granville Grayson, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Dorothy Greig, Special Probationers Nursing Service
Mary Ellen Grow, Sister, Oakenshaw Hospital, Surbiton
Edith Hadfield, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Hull Royal Infirmary
Mary Beatrice Hall, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Jessie Jean Halliday, Staff Nurse, T.F.N.S.
Florence Harley, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Eliza Agnes Harrison, Assistant Matron, T.F.N.S.
Sybil M. Harry, Sister, Headquarters, London
Lizzie Haxell, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Sarah Heaney, Nursing Sister, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Frances Henderson, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Dorothy Henderson, Nursing Sister, Q.A.R.N.N.S.
Helen Catherine Henry, Special Probationer Nursing Service
Georgina Hester, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, University College Hospital
Ruth Hewlett, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Margaret Agnes Hilhard, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Guy's Hospital
Elizabeth Bridges Hill, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Norah Hill, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Gertrude Hind, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Ethel Madeline Gertrude Hirst, Nursing Sister, Q.A.R.N.N.S.
Jennie Holford, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Olive Kathleen Holmes, Nursing Sister, British Red Cross Society
Edith Hounslow, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Amy Howard, Nursing Sister, Canadian Army Nursing Service, Canadian General Hospital, Orpington
Edith Hudson, Nursing Member, Canadian Nursing Service
Ethel Hutchings, Sister, Nursing Service
Florance Hyndman, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Sir Patrick Dun's Hospital, Dublin
Georgina Swinton Jacob, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Sybil Ada Catherine Jarvis, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, St. Bartholomew's Hospital
Lilian Maud Jeans, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Charing Cross Hospital
Dorothy Jobson, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Isobella Kate Jobson, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R., Australia
Nora Johnson, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Sarah Persis Johnson, Nursing Sister, Canadian Army Medical Corps Nursing Service
Mary Ann Jones, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Kate Elizabeth Jones, Matron, Kingston, Surbiton District Red Cross Hospital, New Maiden
Nellie Ida Jordan, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Mabel Kaberry, Acting Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Alicia Mary Kelly, Sister, Army Auxiliary Nursing Service
Evelyn Stewart Killery, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Charlotte Grace Kirkpatrick, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Annie Knox, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Jean Knox, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Helen Lamb, Staff Nurse, T.F.N.S.
Anne Ardagh Langley, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Harriet Lascell, Matron, Kasr-el-Aine Hospital
The Hon. Margaret Cecilia Lawley, Voluntary Aid Detachment
The Hon. Ursula Mary Lawley, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Lorna Priscilla Leatham, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Annie Norrish Lee, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Mary Anderson Linton, Staff Nurse, Civil Hospital Reserve, London Hospital
Constance Little, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Janet McFarlane Livingston, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Mary Frances Looney, Staff Nurse, New Zealand Army Medical Corps Nursing Service
Daisy Lynch, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Leicester Royal County Hospital
Edith Macarthy, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Ella Marie Louise MacFadden, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Nellie Mackenzie, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Annie Forguil Macleod, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Jean Mair, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Letitia Mary Manley, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Middlesex Hospital
Louise Grace Mannell, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Marion S. Marshall, Nursing Sister, Q.A.R.N.N.S.R.
Bertha Martin, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Elizabeth Martin, Nursing Sister, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Mary Barbara Martin, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Esther Chisholme Masterton, Staff Nurse, Civil Hospital Reserve, Glasgow Royal Infirmary
Beatrice Matthews, Staff Nurse, T.F.N.S.
Margaret Ballantyre McBride, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Madeline McCarthy, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Marion McCormick, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Margaret McCort, Nursing Sister, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Mary Scott McDonald, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Susannah Josephine McGann, Staff Nurse, New Zealand Army Nursing Service
Jessie McGillivray, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Mary S. McHugh, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Caroline Amelia McIlrath, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Florence McKellar, Staff Nurse, T.F.N.S.
Joan Davina Carstairs McPherson, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Margaret Meikle, Matron, Cadland Auxiliary Hospital, New Forest, Hampshire
Ebba Wendell de Merrall, Nursing Sister, Canadian Army Nursing Service, Canadian General Hospital, Taplow
Mary Merrill, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Agnes Midgley, Matron, British Red Cross Society
Janet Mitchell, Staff Nurse, T.F.N.S.
Kate Mildred Moore, Matron, Headquarters, London
Grace Morgan, Matron, Arrowe Hall Hospital, Woodchurch, near Birkenhead
Gertrude Daisy Morris, Acting Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S. (retired)
Martha Reid Morrison, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Helena Morrough, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Elizabeth Mosey, Sister, Australian Army Nursing Service
Ellen Murray, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Anne Elizabeth Musson, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Amy Augusta Neville, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Dorothy Jane Louisa Newton, Sister, Army Auxiliary Nursing Service
Elizabeth Scott Newton, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Leith General Hospital
Eliza Jane Nicol, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Helena Nisbett, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Millicent Mary Nix, Nurse, The Princess Christian Hospital, Weymouth
Adeline Annie Pallot, Nursing Sister, Nyasaland Nursing Service
Janet Parry, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Violetta Chancha Paschah, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S. (retired)
Marian Paterson, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, St. Bartholomew's
Margaret Brand Paterson, Nursing Sister, Q.A.R.N.N.S.
Mary Paul, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Edith Payne, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Geraldine Platt, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Sophie Eleanor Pollard, Lady Superintendent, Auxiliary Military Hospital, Thirsk
Mary Pool, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Edith Mary Porter, Assistant Matron, T.F.N.S.
Mary Potts, Acting Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Florence Catharine Puddicombe, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Elsie Evelyn Quilter, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Guy's Hospital
Annie Mary Raine, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Katharine Rapson, Matron, St. George's Hill Auxiliary Hospital, Surrey
Ethel Reade, Sister, South African Medical Nursing Service
Anne Victoria Reay, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R., Australia
Helena Kate Repton, Matron, British Red Cross Society
Maud Reynolds-Knight, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Westminster Hospital
Kate lanthe Richardson, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Guy's Hospital
Sarah Jane Robley, Nursing Sister, Canadian Army Medical Corps, Nursing Service
Amy Frances Rohde, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Mary Francis Ronaldson, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Nottingham General Hospital
Mary Ellen Ruck, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Margaret Rudland, Sister, British Red Cross Society
Dorothea Rudman, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Manchester Royal Infirmary
Alice Mary Sampson, Acting Matron, T.F.N.S.
Mabel Scholes, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Elizabeth Sear, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Margaret Ion Pierson,Special Probationers Nursing Service
Jeanie Fitzpatrick (Nursing Services), Dublin
Ethel L. Shute (Sister Ignatius), Matron, St. Andrew's Hospital, Dollis Hill, London
Lilian Sidebotham, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Mary Simon, Matron, Wykeham Abbey Auxiliary Military Hospital, York
Angela Ford Sister, Nursing Service
Mary Skinner, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Dorothy Carmynow Sloggett, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Ann Smith, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Dora Shanklie Smith, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Ethel Smith, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Mabel Basden Smith, Nursing Sister, Q.A.R.N.N.S.
Elizabeth Smith, Sister, Camberley Auxiliary Military Hospital
Ethel Margaret Spicer, Acting Sister Civil Hospital Reserve, London Hospital
Hilda Frances Starbuck, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Ethel Fowler Stephenson, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Ellenor Stevenson, Matron, Auxiliary Hospital, Henley-in-Arden, Warwick
Mary Ramsay Stewart-Richardson, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Annie Maud Stirling, Nursing Sister, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Emma Jane Stokes, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Isabella Lyle Storar, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Aileen Yvonne Swann, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Dorothy Maud Sweet, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Matilda Goodall Tate, Staff Nurse, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Lavinia Taylor, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Sophie Isabel Thomson, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Jean Todd, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Constance Robina Townend, Assistant Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Lucy Mary Trumble, Staff Nurse, New Zealand Army Nursing Service
Sadie Tyler, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Ethel Frances Upton, Nursing Sister, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Mabel Vivian, Matron, The Princess Christian Hospital, Weymouth
Ellen Constance Wadling, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, St. Thomas's Hospital
Agnes Walker, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Ann Wilson Wallace, Nursing Sister, South African Medical Nursing Service
Dorothy Ward, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Phyllis Mary Waterland, Assistant Matron, British Red Cross Society
Amy Waterman, Acting Sister, Civil Hospital Reserve, Middlesex Hospital
Ethel Frances Watkins, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Agnes Colthart Watson, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Helena Hendrina Weise, Sister, South African Medical Nursing Service
Jean Wells, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Gertrude Whitehurst, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Cicely Wicksteed, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Clarice Malvenie Williams, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Margaret Williams, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Edith Mary Williams, Matron, Red Cross Hospital, Brecon, South Wales
Ida Grace Willis, Assistant Matron, New Zealand Army Nursing Service
Annie Paterson Wilson, Acting Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Isabella Wilson, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S.R.
Eleanor Miriam Woodhouse, Sister, T.F.N.S.
Mary Gertrude Woodrow, Matron, Caenshill Auxiliary Hospital, Weybridge
Elizabeth Ann Woodward, Sister, Q.A.I.M.N.S. (T)
Violet Isobel Wotton, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Elizabeth Young-Scott, Voluntary Aid Detachment
Awarded a Bar to the Royal Red Cross (RRC*)[edit]
Ethel Hope Becher RRC Matron-in-Chief, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Sidney Jane Brown RRC Matron-in-Chief, T.F.N.S. (Retired, Q.A.I.M.N.S.)
Jane Hoadley RRC Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Beatrice Isabel Jones RRC Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Emma Maud McCarthy RRC Matron-in-Chief, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Sarah Elizabeth Oram RRC Principal Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Annie Beadsmore Smith RRC Principal Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
Mary Wilson RRC Principal Matron, Q.A.I.M.N.S.
British Empire Medal (BEM)[edit]

The British Empire Medal for meritorious service
Civil Division[edit]
For services in connection with the War in which great courage or self-sacrifice has been displayed 

Robert Adair. For courage in continuing to work his engine while molten metal was falling round him.
Mary Adams. For courage in assisting others, at great personal risk, in a fire.
Charles Alford. For courage in removing a large quantity of high explosives during a fire.[12]
Arthur Ernest Allen. For courage in rescuing a fellow-worker at great personal risk.
Arthur Joseph Allen. For courage and resource in assisting to extinguish a fire at an explosives factory at great personal risk.
James Andrew. For courage in remaining at his work during a fire which resulted in a very serious explosion.
John Andrewartha, Fitter, Devonport Dockyard. For courage on the occasion of the trials of a submarine.
Edwin Bolwell Andrews. For courage in extinguishing a fire in chemical works under circumstances of grave personal danger.
John Edward Andrews. For courage in keeping up steam immediately after an explosion when another explosion seemed imminent.
Charles Armes, Cable Foreman, General Post Office. Employed on cable ships and small craft in connection with war work in dangerous waters.
F. W. Assirati, Postman. Devotion to duty under specially difficult and dangerous circumstances.
Jesse Attrill, Boatswain, For coolness and resource in averting a serious accident to one of H.M. Ships.
Ethel Alice Auger. For courage and high example in remaining at her post on a tram, and thus preventing severe casualties to fellow-workers. In doing so she was severely injured.
Sidney Aylward. For courage and resource in subduing a fire at imminent personal risk.
George Badger. For courage and self-sacrifice in attempting to save life, in spite of severe personal injuries.
George William Badsey. For courage in fighting, at very great personal risk, a fire caused by an explosion.
John Baillie, Chargeman of Engine Fitter, Northern Base. For courage and perseverance in carrying out work involving much exposure and risk.
George Baird. For courage in saving a child from drowning at the works and returning at once to his work.
Daniel Ball. For courage in having several times effected temporary repairs to important plant in an explosives factory at considerable risk to his life.
George Charles Bannister, For great courage in clearing a man-hole at great personal risk.
John Thomas Barber, Carpenter, General Post Office. Employed on cable ships and small craft in connection with war work in dangerous waters.
Henry Barnard. For courage in fighting a fire at great personal risk while many bags of explosives were being removed.
Thomas Henry Bashford, For great courage on two occasions, entering a tank to recover a fellow-workman who was gassed, and entering a tar still heater.
Robert Baxter. For courage and resource in saving the life of a fellow-worker at great personal risk.
Beatrice Oxley Beaufort. For courage and high example in continuing to do very dangerous experimental work in spite of injuries received in consequence.
Fanny Elizabeth Beaumont, Sorting Clerk and Telegraphist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
John Finnis Beer, Cable Hand. Employed on cable ships and small craft in connection with war work in dangerous waters.
Thomas Bond Bellis. For courage and resource in assisting, at great personal risk, to extinguish a fire at an explosives factory.
Samuel Hall Bennett. For courage in returning to work within an hour of breaking his thumb whilst at work at age 69.
Myra Grace Bessent, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
Sydney Rome Black, Assistant Draughtsman. For courage on the occasion of the trials of a submarine.
James Elias Bloomfield. For courage in extricating living and dead from ruined buildings under circumstances of great danger.
Emmanuel Bloxam, For great courage displayed on the occasion of a serious explosion, when he assisted in extinguishing a fire and saved the life of a fellow-worker at very great personal danger.
Robert Leach Boal. For courage in keeping down a fire in an explosives factory.
Edward Bond. For courage in closing a main valve on a steam boiler at great personal risk of scalding and suffocation.
Francis Booker, Leading Man, Works Department, Portsmouth Dockyard, For perseverance in carrying out certain difficult works in the face of grave risks due to bad weather.
John Booth. For courage in extinguishing a fire on two occasions at very great personal risk.
Lilian Ada Bostock, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
Arthur Bradbury. For courage in dealing with fires in an explosives factory and remaining at work in a poisonous atmosphere in order to ensure the safety of plant.
George Arthur Bradbury. For courage in assisting to extinguish a fire in an explosives factory at great personal risk.
Martha Bramhall. For courage in remaining continuously afc a very dangerous task in spite of the occurrence of several explosions.
J. H. Brelsford. For courage in assisting, though severely injured, to rescue fellow-workers and to extinguish a fire which resulted in a very serious explosion.
Amelia Brisley. For courage and high example in cases of explosion in a factory.
Emily Brooke, For great courage shown at an outbreak of fire in an explosives factory.
Andrew Brown, For conspicuous courage in stopping a fire and giving the alarm, under circumstances of the gravest personal danger, after he had been injured by the explosion and rendered unconscious.
Edwin Brown. For courage in extinguishing a fire after an explosion in which he lost the sight of an eye, and enabling 600 of his fellow-workers to get clear.
Ethel Brown. For courage on the occasion of a fire in an explosives factory.
Harry Brown. For courage in working continuously under circumstances of very great danger.
Mary Brown. For courage and high example in getting work started again under circumstances of considerable danger.
William Bryant. For courage in preventing further serious explosion in a filling factory, at very great personal risk.
John Buckley. For courage and self-sacrifice in carrying out dangerous experiments.
Margaret Winifred Burdett-Coutts. For courage in that, after losing a finger and badly lacerating her hand in a circular saw, she went away quietly to have it treated, in. order not to unnerve her fellow workers.
Marion Burrell, Sorting Clerk and Telegraphist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
James Burton, For great courage in rescuing workers from burning explosives shops, at great personal risk.
Louisa Busby. For courage in returning to work after an accident resulting in loss of right hand and other injuries.
Edith Butler. For courage, resource, and high example. Has saved the lives of at least two workers, and has displayed exceptional skill and courage in several serious accidents.
Gertrude Elizabeth Butler. For courage and high example in continuing at her work during a fire, under circumstances of great danger.
George Patrick Campbell, Carpenter, General Post Office. Employed on cable ships and small craft, in connection with war work in dangerous waters.
Richard Cardo. For courage and resource shown on several occasions under circumstances of great personal danger.
Louisa Margaret Carlton, Supervisor, Telephones. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids and bombardment from the sea.
Samuel Carter. For courage and resource in saving the life of a chemist and three workers who were overcome by fumes in an explosives factory.
Florence Marie Cass, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty while in charge of a telephone exchange during a serious explosion at a neighbouring munition works.
Sydney Chambers, For great courage in rescuing workers from burning explosives shops at great personal risk.
William Frank Chorley. For courage in removing a large quantity of high explosives during a fire.
Annie Clarke. For courage in keeping workers together under circumstances of great danger.
Mabel Eleanor Clarke, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
Alexander Clelland. For courage and resource under circumstances of great danger.
Gertrude Coles. For courage in returning to work after her hand had been mutilated by an explosion.
John Oorder. For courage in fighting a fire caused by an explosion, at very great personal risk.
Alexander Cornelius. For courage in having, on two occasions, saved a large amount of raw material in an explosives factory at the risk of his life.
Thomas Cosby, Fitter, Devonport Dockyard. For courage on the occasion of the trials of a new submarine.
Herbert Luigi Costa. For courage in continuing to work under circumstances of great danger.
Mabel Rosa Cox, Chargewoman, Royal Naval Cordite Factory, For devotion to duty and great presence of mind in averting an explosion when in charge of a guncotton press.
May Victoria Croucher. For courage and high example on the occasion of a fire at an explosives factory.
Thomas Crutchley. For courage in entering a gas main and saving the lives of two workers who were gassed, at very great personal risk.
Sophia Cunningham. For courage and high example in continuing her duties immediately after a severe explosion.
John Cuskearn. For courage in making a determined attempt to recover a valuable instrument from the cooling pond, in consequence of which he contracted blood poisoning and nearly died.
Lucie Jane Dartnell, Sorting Clerk and Telegraphist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
James Davidson, Bricklayer's Labourer. For courage in rescuing a fellow-workman who had been overcome by gas inside a gas apparatus.
Ben Davies. For courage and high example in remaining at work for an hour after being painfully burnt on his hands, face and neck, and returning to duty for another five hours immediately after treatment.
James Henry Davies, Skilled Workman, General Post Office. Showed habitual courage in carrying out repairs to submarine cables in difficult and dangerous waters.
Robert John Davies, Electrical Fitter, Devonport Dockyard. For courage and self-sacrifice on the occasion of an explosion on a submarine boat, on which he was at work.
Violet Annie Davies. For courage in remaining at her post at the telephone during a severe explosion. Age 15.
William Dixon. For courage in rescuing a fellow-worker at great personal risk.
Joseph Doran. For courage and resource in preventing a fire in an explosives factory, under exceptionally dangerous circumstances.
James Downie, Engine Fitter. For courage and prompt action in helping to extinguish fires which had broken out in the stokeholds of two patrol vessels fitting out.
John Duff. For courage in preventing a serious explosion under circumstances of great danger.
James Duffy. For courage in attempting to stop a fire in an explosives factory under exceptionally dangerous circumstances.
Peter Dunbabin. For courage and self-sacrifice in carrying out dangerous experiments.
Lucien Duncombe. For courage in removing a large quantity of high explosives during a fire.
Albun Dunn. For courage in saving the life of a fellow worker after an explosion, and giving the alarm, although himself injured by an explosion.
Bertha Annie Florence Easter, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
Nicholas Edghill. For courage in helping to subdue fire at great personal risk.
Mabel Ann Edwards. For courage and high example on the occasion of a fire at an explosives factory.
Nora Egan, For great courage shown at an outbreak of fire in an explosives factory.
Henry Etheridge, Skilled Workman, General Post Office. Employed on cable ships and small craft in connection with war work in dangerous waters.
Frank Cyril Evans, For self-sacrifice in continuing to work, though blind in one eye and the other affected, caused by an accident at work, and in spite of constant pain.
Fred Evans. For courage and self-sacrifice in carrying out dangerous experiments.
James Evans. For courage and self-sacrifice in carrying out dangerous experiments.
May Evans. For courage in assisting to stop a fire in an explosives factory at considerable danger to her life.
Francis Fagan, Special Constable, For rescuing a drowning man from Holyhead Harbour in circumstances of difficulty and danger.
Alfred William James Fautley. For courage and resource in stopping a fire in highly inflammable material, at the risk of his life and at the cost of severe injuries.
Rosa Frances Finbow. For courage in returning to work after serious injury to her face through an explosion.
Jane Fisher. For courage in assisting to stop a fire in an explosives factory at considerable danger to her life.
Maude Fisher, For great courage shown at an outbreak of fire in an explosives factory.
Michael Fitzpatrick. For courage in attempting to save part of an explosives factory at great risk of his life.
Bertha Flintoff, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during an air-raid.
James Harold Foster. For courage in helping to extinguish a fire at cost of serious injuries to himself.
Bernard John Francis. For courage and resource in saving the life of a fellow worker.
Frank Charles Frazer. For courage in preventing an explosion in a filling factory at great personal risk, though partly blinded and suffering considerable pain from explosion.
William Gilchrist, For self-sacrifice and high example in persisting in work which is often dangerous, though suffering from an incurable disease and often suffering great pain.
Margaret Annie Louise Godfrey, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during an air-raid.
Robert William Godfrey, Diver, Admiralty Salvage Section. For courage and devotion to duty in Gallipoli, diving on many occasions when the beaches were being shelled.
William Gommersall, For several acts of great courage and self-sacrifice.
Edna Goodenough, For continuing to work after suffering serious injuries through an explosion, resulting in loss of right eye.
James Gosling. For courage in removing a large quantity of high explosives during a fire.
James Grainger. For courage in having, on two occasions, continued at his work in an explosives factory under circumstances of great danger, thereby stopping further damage.
Frank Wallis Green. For courage and resource in subduing a fire at imminent personal risk.
John Green. For courage and self-sacrifice in dealing with acid and poisonous fumes.
Thomas Edwin Ernest Griffiths. For courage in removing a large quantity of high explosives during a fire.
Frederick Thomas Grigsby. For courage and high example in continuing at his duty during a series of severe explosions.
Frederick Edward Hall. For courage in carrying out very dangerous experiments in a highly-poisonous atmosphere.
James Hamilton. For courage and resource in preventing a fire in an explosives factory under exceptionally dangerous circumstances.
Alice Hanson, For great courage shown at an outbreak of fire in an explosives factory.
James Harley, Assistant Foreman Ironworker. For courage in entering a confined space in a vessel, which was full of noxious fumes, and plugging holes in the structure.
Elsie Lilian Harman, Supervisor, Telephones. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
John David Harris
Doris Hirst, Telephonist. For courage in fighting a fire caused by an explosion, at very great personal risk.
Mary Hartley. For courage and high example: in remaining at her engine and controlling it after having been badly wounded by breakage, of the governor and returning to her work a week later.
Thomas Havery, Chancery Servant at the British Embassy, Petrograd. Courageous conduct in the discharge of has duties during the revolutionary disturbances in March 1917.
E. James Hawkins. For courage in preventing an explosion and fire at great personal risk.
William Henry Hayden, For great courage at very great personal risk on the occasion of several fires in a filling factory.
Ethel Head. For courage and high example in rescuing fellow workers after an explosion.
Alice Ann Healey, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
William Heather, Cable Foreman, General Post Office. Employed on cable ships and small craft in connection with war work in dangerous waters.
William Hemmingsley. For courage and resource in saving the life of a fellow worker.
Harry Hepworth, For great courage shown at an outbreak of fire in an explosion factory.
Gladys Elizabeth Herrington. For courage in volunteering to undertake dangerous work after a fatal accident.
Amos Freke Hesman. For courage in preventing an explosion and fire, at great personal risk.
William Hewitt. For courage in saving the life of a fellow worker, who was overcome by poisonous fumes, at great personal risk.
Ethel Nora Elizabeth Hickey, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids and on the occasion of a fire.
Thomas Hickey, Skilled Workman, General Post Office. Has displayed great courage while carrying out telegraph work under dangerous conditions.
William Charles Hicks, Skilled Workman, General Post Office. Has rendered valuable service since the beginning of the war. Has remained at his post absolutely alone day and night, in spite of danger from submarine or other attacks.
Alfred Higgs. For courage and resource in saving the lives of two of his fellow workers, at great personal risk.
Frederick Higham, Special Constable. Swam to an airship which had fallen into a river and assisted two of the crew to reach the bank.
Edward Hill, Steel Smelter. For courage and endurance on many occasions. Remained at her post until relieved, on the occasion of a very serious explosion at munition works, notwithstanding the fact that the explosions were almost, continuous, and that the police advised the officers on duty to leave the building.
George William Hobbs, Boatswain, General Post Office. Employed on cable ships in connection with war work in dangerous waters.
Thomas William Hobbs, Chargeman of Engine Fitters, Devonport Dockyard. For courage on the occasion of the trials of a new submarine.
Frank Hodgkinson. For courage in assisting to extinguish a fire in an explosives factory, at great personal risk.
George Hogan. For courage and resource in subduing a fire, at imminent personal risk.
Victoria Irene Holdsworth. For courage and resource in preventing serious injuries to a fellow worker.
Annie Holly. For courage in continuing at work, though suffering from severe injuries to eye, caused by an explosion.
Janet Holmes. For courage and resource on the occasion of an explosion in a filling factory.
Mrs Holttum. For courage in assisting to save the lives of fellow workers during a fire which resulted in a serious explosion, though sustaining severe injuries herself.
G. Hulley. For courage in assisting to extinguish a fire, which resulted in a very serious explosion.
William Hulme. For courage in assisting to extinguish a fire in an explosives factory, at great personal risk.
Mabel Hunt, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during an air raid.
Walter William Hunt. For courage in saving the life of a fellow worker.
William Hunt. For courage and resource on two occasions in preventing serious fires. Age 66.
Frederick Innes, For high courage and resource in closing the outlet valve of a collapsed gas-holder, in which the gas was alight.
Horace Ivin, Skilled Workman, General Post Office. Has done valuable service under dangerous conditions, repairing submarine cables carrying naval and military wires.
Florence Jackson. For courage displayed during a time of great danger in a filling factory.
William Jackson. For courage and resource in saving the life of a fellow worker at very great risk to himself.
Herbert Janes. For courage in returning to work immediately after his hand had been dressed on account of his losing three fingers in a shearing machine.
Jack Lane Jeffery. For courage connected with production and testing of exceptionally dangerous materials.
Charles William Johnson. For courage and resource shown on several occasions under circumstances of great personal danger.
Charles William James Johnson. For courage in carrying out repairs to plant in explosives factory in the presence of dangerous gases.
Ellen Johnson, Sorting Clerk and Telegraphist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
Alfred Frank Jones, For great courage and high example shown on the occasion of a severe ex-plosion in an explosives factory.
John Richard Jones. For courage and resource in assisting to extinguish a fire at an explosives factory at great personal risk.
Maurice Jones, Inspector, Engineering Department, General Post Office. Has carried out two very dangerous missions, successfully passing through hostile lines at great personal risk.
Robert Jones. For courage and resource in assisting to extinguish a fire at a filling factory, at imminent risk of serious explosion.
Thomas Jones. For courage and high example in doing hard work for long hours in spite of his age (79 years).
George Henry Jordan. For courage in fighting a fire caused by an explosion, at very great personal risk.
John Kane. For courage in saving the lives of several fellow-workers who were buried in the lining of a furnace which they were repairing.
W. A. Keeling. For courage in remaining at his work during a fire which resulted in a very serious explosion.
Mary Keenan. For courage and high example on the work after sustaining severe injury to face and eyes, on account of an explosion.
Mary Kiaer. For courage and high example on the occasion of a fire at a filling factory.
Herbert John King. For courage in extinguishing a fire in an explosives factory at very great risk to his life.
Rosa Kate Kipling. For courage in returning to her work after seven and a half months serious illness and several operations caused by an explosion.
James Kirby, Ship Fitter, Portsmouth Dockyard, For self-sacrifice in helping to extricate an injured fellow-workman from a place of danger, though he himself was dangerously injured.
Walter Reginald Knight. For courage in assisting to extinguish a fire in an explosives factory and removing explosives from the burning building.
John Knox. For courage in saving the lives of several fellow-workers who were buried in the lining of a furnace which they were repairing.
Robert Lake, Fitter and Outside Erector. For courage on board a submarine in dangerous circumstances.
Patrick Lambe, Skilled Workman, General Post Office. Rendered very valuable service in picking up and repairing wires which had been shotdown.
Charles Henry Lambert, Master Mariner, Examination Service and Rescue Tugs, Dover Dockyard. For courage and skill displayed in towing cargo and other ships out of a minefield after they had been mined.
Albert Frederick Lane. For courage and high example on the occasion of a fire in an explosives factory.
Philip C. Langridge, Inspector, Engineering Department, General Post Office. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
Michael Lavelle. For courage and self-sacrifice in carrying out dangerous experiments.
Ada Mary Laws, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to-duty during air-raids.
Ethel Mary Leeds, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during, air-raids.
Mabel Lethbridge. For courage and high example shown on the occasion of an accident in a filling factory, causing loss of one leg and severe injuries to the other.
John James Lewes, Skilled Labourer, Works Department, Portsmouth Dockyard, For great skill and daring in the performance of difficult and dangerous work in connection with certain works at Portsmouth.
Frederick John Lewis, Leading Man (Diver), Chatham Dockyard. For courage, skill and resource exhibited in a marked degree.
Alfred Leyland. For courage and self-sacrifice in carrying, out dangerous experiments.
Albert Lickess, For great courage and high example shown in dealing with a fire at an explosives factory under circumstances of very exceptional danger.
Arthur Lipscombe. For courage in stopping a fire in a powder factory under circumstances of exceptional danger to his life.
Robert Andrew Lockwood, Skilled Workman, General Post Office. Has done exceptional service during rough weather in effecting repairs to submarine cables carrying naval and military wires.
Tom Oliver Lodder, Skilled Workman, General Post Office. Showed great courage and devotion while in charge of a telegraph station, carrying out his duties under fire.
Albert James Lowe. For courage in removing a large quantity of high explosives during a fire.
Alice Ludlow. For courage and high example on the occasion of an explosion and prompt return to work.
William Me Alpine. For courage and self-sacrifice in returning to work after losing, three fingers of right, hand owing to an accident and before the wounds were properly healed.
Agnes McCann. For courage and resource in saving the life of a fellow-worker entangled in dangerously running machinery, at great risk to her life.
James McDonald. For courage in attempting to save the life of a fellow-worker who was gassed in a gas main by entering it at very great personal risk.
James McDonald, Ironwork Erector. For courage in the rescue of fellow workmen who were overcome by gas.
George McDougall. For courage in saving the lives of several fellow-workers who were buried in the lining of a furnace which they were repairing.
Edward McFarlane. For courage in saving the lives of two of his fellow-workers by entering an ash receiver full of monoxide gas.
James McGhie, Under Foreman Joiner, For bravery at the cost of serious personal injury in saving a half-blind labourer from being run over by a locomotive.
Michael McGrath. For courage in ascending a furnace under conditions so dangerous that all others had refused to do so.
May Louise Mclntyre. For courage and high example on the occasion of an accident at a filling factory.
John McMaddocks, For great courage on the occasion of a fire in an explosives factory. He brought the drenchers into action, and used his own body to prevent draught fanning the flames in stoves. Male, Albert Herbert. For courage on the occasion of a fire in an explosives factory.
Daisy Marsh. For courage and resource in utilising emergency fire appliances on the occasion of an explosion at an explosives factory.
Thomas Martin. For courage displayed on two occasions in dealing with an explosion and a fire at works producing highly inflammable liquids under circumstances of exceptional danger.
Mollie Josephine Mason, Munition Worker, Chatham Dockyard. For courage and presence of mind in averting panic among women workers who were occupants of an overturned railway carriage.
Robert Massey. For courage and self-sacrifice in carrying out dangerous experiments.
John Master. For courage in preventing an explosion and fire at great personal risk.
Edith Blanche Maw, Supervisor, Telephones. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
William Alfred Mayall. For courage and high example on the occasion of a fire in an explosives factory.
Edward Medine. For courage in saving the lives of several fellow workers who, were buried in the lining of a furnace which they were repairing.
Walter Mee. For courage and resource in dealing with a fire at the cost of bodily injury.
James Menzies. For courage and high example on the occasion of a serious explosion.
William Meredith. For courage in saving the life of a fellow workman who had been rendered unconscious by foul gas.
Annie Dyer Merralls, Supervisor, Telephones. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
Robert Miller. For courage in saving the life of a fellow worker who was overcome by poisonous fumes, at great personal risk.
Rose Mills. For courage displayed on the occasion of an explosion, at great personal risk.
G. Mitchell. For courage in assisting to extinguish a fire which resulted in a very serious explosion.
George Edgar Mitchell. For courage and high, example on several occasions of explosion and fire in a shell filling; factory.
John Joseph Christopher Monks, Skilled Workman, General Post Office. On many occasions continued his work under fire, displaying great zeal and courage
Margaret Moody, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
David George Morgan. For courage and high example in picking up and drowning a shell which had become accidentally ignited.
William Morgan. For courage and resource in assisting to extinguish a fire at a filling factory, at imminent risk of serious explosion.
Nora Morphet. For courage and high example in continuously working long hours in a poisonous atmosphere which habitually affected her health.
Frederick Thomas Morris. For courage on the occasion of a fire in an explosives factory.
Maggie Mulholland. For courage and very high example in her behaviour when in charge of a canteen adjoining a store of explosives which was on fire.
George Myers. For courage and self-sacrifice in carrying out dangerous experiments.
Abraham Naar, Sorter. Devotion to duty under specially difficult and dangerous circumstances.
Thomas Nadin, Engineer of Yard Craft, Sheexness Dockyard. For courage, self-sacrifice and exceptional skill in the salvage of a merchant ship in a minefield.
Arthur John Neal. For courage in a serious accident due to bursting of crucible of melted metal. Though, severely injured; he kept the others calm and had them attended to first, though they were in less danger.
Joan Nelson. For courage in continuing to work in an explosives factory, under circumstances of grave danger.
George William Newson. For courage in fighting a fire caused by an explosion, at very great personal risk.
Violet Newton. For courage in returning to work after a serious accident in which two workers were killed, and she was severely injured.
G. R. Norris. For courage in remaining at his wort during a fire which resulted in a very serious explosion, from which he suffered bodily injuries.
James Joseph O'Callaghan. For courage in extinguishing a fire on the wooden roof of part of a filling factory, under exceptionally dangerous circumstances. O'Keefe, Percy. For courage in assisting to extinguish a fire in an explosives factory, and removing explosives from the turning building.
Edward Henry Lewis Owen, Cable Hand, General Post Office. Employed on cable ships and small craft in connection with war work in dangerous waters.
Roland Basset Paine. For courage displayed on the occasion of a severe accident resulting in serious mutilation of his hand. He insisted on returning to his dangerous occupation as soon as bandages were removed.
Nellie Ena Ann Palmer, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
Charles Parker, Skilled Labourer, Devonport Dockyard, For self-sacrifice and distinguished conduct whilst engaged on salvage operations.
William Parker. For courage (1) in helping to extinguish a fire in tar works contiguous to filling factory at great personal risk; (2) in attempting to rescue a surveyor and workman gassed in a sewer, at great risk to his life.
George Parkinson. For courage and resource in preventing a serious explosion at an explosives factory.
Frederick Payne. For courage in dealing with a fire caused by an explosion, under exceptionally dangerous circumstances.
Agnes Pearson, Telephonist. On the occasion of a very serious explosion at munition works she remained at her post until relieved, notwithstanding the fact that the explosions were almost continuous and that the police advised the officers on duty to leave the building.
Georgina Peeters. For courage and resource in saving the life of a fellow-worker by stopping a machine at great risk to herself.
Wilfred Edward Pendray. For courage in recovering the plug of a cock under circumstances of grave.danger.
Mary Pendreigh. For courage and high example on the occasion of an accident at a filling factory.
Frederick William Pepper, For great courage in rescuing workers from burning explosives shops at great personal risk.
Robert Charles Percy, Acting Inspector of Shipwrights (formerly Chargeman), Northern Base, For devotion to duty in effecting repairs under dangerous conditions.
Agnes Mary Peters, For great courage and high example in continuing to do work of an exceptionally dangerous nature, which finally resulted in an accident, by which she was totally blinded and otherwise injured.
Daniel Plume. For courage shown on the occasion of an explosion and at several minor fires, at great personal risk.
Walter Plummer, Skilled Labourer, Portsmouth Dockyard. For courage and perseverance in the performance of his duties during an explosion.
Walter Poll. For courage and high example in dealing with a serious fire at a gas works.
John Thomas Poole, Master of Yard Craft, Chatham Dockyard, For perseverance and conspicuous skill under conditions of extreme difficulty and danger.
Henry William John Porter, Skilled Workman, General Post Office. Showed courage and devotion to duty during repeated air-raids. On one occasion he set to work on the restoration of naval circuits while explosions were taking place fifty yards away.
Ellen Lenora Potter. For courage and resource in extinguishing a fire, at great personal risk.
James Pound, For self-sacrifice in working long hours in a highly poisonous atmosphere, where he was several times burnt by acid, and at times almost overcome by fumes.
Harry Price. For courage and self-sacrifice in carrying out dangerous experiments.
William Henry Price. For courage in attempting to stop a fire in an explosives factory under exceptionally dangerous circumstances. He lost four fingers and practically the use of both hands, while his face was permanently disfigured.
William Thomas Pugh. For courage on the occasion of a fire in an explosives factory.
Florence Pullen. For courage in continuing to work in spite of serious suffering from an accident caused by an explosion.
Ethel Mary Pullinger, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air-raids.
Richard Hayward Purser. For courage and self-sacrifice in working long hours in spite of severe physical disabilities brought about by hardships incurred in the retreat from Mons.
Robert Rae, Coastwatcher, Machrihanish, Kintyre, For rendering valuable assistance to one of H.M. Ships under conditions of great difficulty.
William H. Rawlin. For courage and high example in saving workers and maintaining order on the occasion of an explosion in a filling factory.
William Dennis Eeardon, Sorter. Devotion to duty under specially difficult and dangerous circumstances.
Albert Edward Reeves. For courage in recovering the plug of a cock under circumstances of grave danger.
Donald Renfrew, Chief Draughtsman, Kelvin, Bottomley & Baird, Ltd. For courage on the occasion of the trials of a submarine.
Robert Roberts. For courage in saving the life of a fellow worker at a fire in an explosives factory, under exceptionally dangerous circumstances.
George Robinson. For courage and self-sacrifice in carrying out dangerous experiments.
Maggie Rock. For courage and high example on the occasion of an accident at a filling factory.
Charles William Beaver Roll. For courage in attempting to rescue his foreman, by entering an ash receiver full of carbon monoxide gas.
James Gordon Ross, Skilled Workman, General Post Office. Displayed courage and resource in maintaining telephonic communication during, an air-raid.
Alfred Rudge. For courage in extinguishing a fire in an explosives factory at very great risk to his life.
Thomas William Rudge, Millwright. For courage and coolness whilst engaged on dangerous work.
John Ryan, Mate of Yard draft, Haulbowline Dockyard, For his splendid example of pluck and discipline during, salvage operations.
Thomas Ryan. For courage in removing a large quantity of higih explosives during a fire.
Alfred Salenger. For courage and self-sacrifice in volunteering for work on dangerous experiments, in the course of which he lost four fingers.
John Frederick Sams. For courage and high example in remaining at his post on a tram, and thus preventing severe casualties to fellow-workers. In doing so he was severely injured.
Richard Sanders, Engine Fitter, Devonport Dockyard. For courage on the occasion of the trials of a new submarine.
William Saunders. For courage in attempting to save the lives of workers who were gassed in a gas main, at very great personal risk.
Edward Scott. For courage in averting a serious accident in a mill, at grave risk to his own life. His arm was badly crushed, and has since had to be amputated.
Percy Sears. For courage and his example in preventing a fire in an explosives factory, at grave risk to his life.
Charlie Shaw. For courage and resource in dealing with a fire at an explosives factory, at great personal risk.
Leonard Short, Engine Fitter, Portsmouth Dockyard. For courage and self-sacrifice during salvage operations.
Lawrence Simpson. For courage in extinguishing a fire on two occasions, at very great personal risk.
Sydney Simpson, Skilled Workman, General Post Office. Showed great courage as well as resource on the occasion of a very severe explosion at adjoining munition works. He sent away to a safe place the women operators, and himself maintained uninterrupted telephonic communication.
William Sinclair. For courage in rescuing a driver who was underneath a railway engine which had begun to move.
Harry Skinner. For courage and resource (1) in extinguishing a fire in a filling factory at imminent risk of serious explosion, (2) in rescuing two fellow-workers gassed in a sewer, at very great personal risk.
Laurence Skinner. For courage in attempting to stop a fire in an explosives factory under exceptionally dangerous circumstances.
Frank Slater, For great courage shown during a fire in an explosives factory.
Minnie Sleeford, Assistant Supervisor, Telephones. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air raids.
Beatrice Evelyn Smith. For courage in returning to her post at the risk of her life in order to avert danger to the works.
Francis Emily Esther Smith, Supervisor, Telephones. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air raids.
John Smith. For courage in assisting to extinguish a fire in an explosives factory at great personal risk.
Thomas William Fletcher Smith, Tug Master, Dover Dockyard. For courage, initiative and perseverance on salvage operations.
James Snape. For courage and high example in quelling fires during an explosion at great personal risk.
William Snead. For courage in entering a gas main and saving the lives of two workers who were gassed, at very great personal risk.
Sidney Charles Soley. For courage and resource in dealing with a hand grenade about to explode, whereby he saved several lives.
Hannah Spash. For courage and high example in continuing her work in a filling factory, after having been on three separate occasions injured by explosions.
Edward Spencer. For courage and high example in continuing at work in an explosives factory under circumstances of grave danger.
Sidney Arthur Stammers, Cable Hand, General Post Office. Employed on cable ships and small craft in connection with war work in dangerous waters.
Lily Stanyon. For courage and resource in saving the life of a crane driver at considerable risk to herself.
Edith Steed. For courage and high example in volunteering immediately after a fatal accident to undertake the more dangerous work in the department concerned.
Florence Eliza Steggel, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air raids.
Fanny Eleanor Steward, Assistant Supervisor, Telephones. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air raids.
John Stewart. For courage in remaining at work and seeing his job through after being severely shaken by an explosion at an explosives factory.
George William Stocks, Leading Cable Hand. Employed on cable ships and small craft in connection with war work in dangerous waters.
Walter Stokes. For courage in attempting to save the lives of two workers who were gassed in a gas main by entering it at very great personal risk.
William Leverington Stokes. For courage in volunteering to extinguish a fire at cost of serious injuries.
George Robert Stone, Master of Yard Craft, Sheerness Dockyard. For courage, self-sacrifice and exception, all in skill in the salvage of a merchant ship in a minefield.
Maggie Storey. For courage and high example in extinguishing a dangerous fire at an explosives factory under exceptionally risky circumstances.
Ernest Stubley. For courage in remaining at his post in circumstances of considerable danger in order to safeguard the works.
Robert Studbohne. For courage and resource in preventing a serious explosion at an explosives factory.
Gilbert George Sutcliffe, Inspector, Engineering Department, General Post Office. Rendered valuable service in the construction and maintenance of telephones under fire.
Herbert Sykes. For courage in testing aircraft in spite of severe accidents.
Walter William James Symons, Shipwright Apprentice. For courage and presence of mind in the rescue of a fellow-workman from drowning.
Samuel William Tabb, Acting Mate of Yard Craft, Devonport Dockyard. For courage and skill in handling his tug in assisting to rescue a torpedoed merchant ship from a dangerous position in heavy weather.
Joseph Edward Talbot. For courage in continuing to work in a poisonous atmosphere, even though suffering seriously from effects.
Alfred Tansom, Chargeman of Baggers, Portsmouth Dockyard. For courage and coolness in urgent salvage operations.
Frederick Francis Taylor. For courage in fighting a fire at great personal risk while many bags of explosives were being removed.
George Terry. For courage in working continuously under circumstances of very great danger.
Charles William Thome, Engineer, For perseverance and devotion to duty in trying circumstances, often attended by considerable danger.
Samuel George Thorneycroft. For courage on the occasion of a fire in an explosives factory.
Thomas Tickner. For courage and resource in dealing with an outbreak of fire at a filling factory.
William John Tidey. For courage in fighting a fire, caused by an explosion, at very great personal risk.
Joseph Henry Trask, Special Constable. For courage in rescuing injured men from a burning and collapsed building at great personal risk.
Walter Trebble, Skilled Labourer, Works Department, Portsmouth Dockyard, For great skill and daring in the performance of difficult and dangerous work in connection with certain works at Portsmouth.
William Trotman, Engine Fitter, Devonport Dockyard. For courage on the occasion of the trials of a new submarine.
Ella Trout, While fishing, accompanied only by a boy of ten, she saw that a steamer had been torpedoed and was sinking. Though fully realising the danger she ran from enemy submarines, she pulled rapidly to the wreck and succeeded in rescuing a drowning sailor.
Alfred Clifford George Valentine. For courage and resource in dealing with a shell in which the top ring of the fuse had fired.
E. Vass. For courage in stopping a fire in an explosives factory at grave risk to his life.
Edith Emily Venus, Supervisor, Telephones. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air raids.
Robert George Vicary. For courage displayed on the occasion of an explosion. He continued to work, though permanently injured by the accident.
Mary Walker. For courage in continuing to work in an explosives factory under circumstances of grave danger.
Ernest Wall, For two acts: of courage and self-sacrifice in clearing a choked acid main, and on the occasion of a fire in an explosives factory.
John M. Wallace, Electrical Fitter. For courage, initiative and devotion to duty in trying circumstances.
Lilian Blanche Wallace. For courage displayed during a time of great danger in a filling factory.
Amelia Jane Ward, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air raids and bombardments from the sea.
Daniel Vincent Ward, Inspector, Engineering Department, General Post Office. Displayed courage and resource while Controlling Officer in a neighbourhood exposed to many bombardments by sea-craft and aeroplanes.
George Frederick Ward. For courage in shutting off outlet master valve of a gasholder during a fire caused by explosion, at serious personal risk.
Nellie Ward, Supervisor, Telephones. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air raids.
Frances Mary Watson. For courage on the occasion of a serious explosion and assisting a fellow-worker to escape at great personal danger.
Frank Watson. For courage in removing a large quantity of high explosives during a fire.
John Watson. For courage in attempting to rescue his foreman by entering an ash receiver full of carbon monoxide gas.
Ada Watt. For courage in continuing to work in an explosives factory under circumstances of grave danger.
Arthur Webber. For courage and resource in giving valuable assistance on the occasion of an explosion at an explosives factory.
Dorothy Kate West, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air raids.
George Whatton. For courage and resource in subduing a fire at imminent personal risk.
Dorothy Florence Whibley, Telephonist. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during an air raid.
Robert Leonard White. For courage in remaining at his work after being very seriously injured.
Mary Agnes Wilkinson, Telephonist. Rendered invaluable service at a telephone exchange on the occasion of a fire and serious explosion at a munition works close by, proceeding to her post through the danger zone at grave personal risk.
William Williams. For courage and resource in extinguishing a fire under circumstances of exceptional danger.
James Winter, Inspector, Engineering Department, General Post Office. Rendered special services in repairing wires under very dangerous conditions and was frequently under fire.
Gertrude Wood, Supervisor, Telephones. Displayed great courage and devotion to duty during air raids.
Alfred Charles Wright, For great courage in rescuing workers from burning explosives shops at great personal risk.
William Wyatt, Skilled Labourer (Stoker), Sheerness Dockyard, For his self-sacrifice and devotion to duty in a time of danger.
James Youll. For courage in saving the life of a fellow workman who had been rendered unconscious by foul gas.
Alfred Charles Wright Young. For great courage in rescuing workers from burning explosives shops at great personal risk.
Distinguished Service Order (DSO)[edit]

Riband and Badge of the Distinguished Service Order
Vice-Admiral Evelyn Robert le Marchant
Rear-Admiral Reginald Arthur Allenby MVO
Rear-Admiral Cyril Everard Tower
Rear-Admiral Herbert Arthur Stevenson Fyler CB
Wing Commander Peregrine Forbes Morant Fellowes RN
Engr. Commander Mark Rundle RN
Staff Paymaster Hugh Miller RN
Staff Surgeon Henry Cooper BA RN
Lt.-Commander Charles Mahon Redhead RD Royal Naval Reserve
Flight Commander Alexander MacDonald Shook DSC Royal Naval Air Service
Maj. Henry Shafto Adair, Cheshire Regiment
Maj. Henry Rainier Adams, Royal Garrison Artillery
Col. John Ainsworth CMG Royal Artillery Forces
Rev. Michael Adler, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Maj. Nigel Woodford Aitken MC Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. William Philip Jopp Akerman MC Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Edmund Alderson MD RAMC
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Percy Stuart Allan, Gordon Highlanders
Capt. Stanley Guy Allden, Army Service Corps
Lt.-Col. Lewis Arthur Allen, Army Service Corps
Maj. Henry Irving Rodney Allfrey MC Somerset Light Infantry
Capt. Arthur Emilius David Anderson MC King's Own Scottish Borderers
Maj. Charles Abbot Anderson, Manchester Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Cecil Ford Anderson, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. John Anderson, RAMC
Capt. Walter Alexander Armitage, York & Lancaster Regiment, and Machine Gun Corps
Maj. Bening Mourant Arnold, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. Francis Anson Arnold-Foster, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Kenneth Hugh Lowden Arnott MC East Lancashire Regiment
Maj. James Arnold Arrowsmith-Brown, Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. Sydney William Louis Aschwanden, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Frederic St. John Atkinson, Horse, Indian Army
Capt. Henry Lancelot Aubrey-Fletcher MVO Grenadier Guards
Capt. Eric William Fane Aylwin-Foster, Army Service Corps
Lt.-Col. Stafford Charles Babington, Royal Engineers
Maj. Edward Alec Horsman Bailey, Royal Field Artillery
Rev. Charles Frederick Baines MA Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Maj. Sir Randolf Littlehales Baker Bt Yeomanry
Tmp Major Robert Cecil Bamford, West Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. Kenneth Barge MC Cavalry, Indian Army
Lt.-Col. Frederic Edward Lloyd Barker, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Archibald Stonham Barnwell, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Robert McGowan Barrington-Ward MC General List
Lt.-Col. Netterville Guy Barron, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt.-Col. Harold Percy Waller Barrow CMG RAMC
Capt. and Bt. Major Alfred James Napier Bartlett, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Maj. John Channon Bassett, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Harold Henry Bateman MC Royal Engineers
Capt. Austin Graves Bates MC Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Cecil Robert Bates MC Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Lancelot Richmond Beadon, Army Service Corps
Maj. Robert Longfield Beasley, Gloucestershire Regiment
Capt. Lancelot Edward Becher, Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. William Thomas Clifford Beckett, North Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Major Charles Thomas Cook Beecroft, Army Service Corps
Capt. Hugh Maurice Bellamy MC Lincolnshire Regiment
Tmp Major Robert Benzie, South Wales Borderers
Tmp Lt.-Col. Julian Falvey Beyts, Durham Light Infantry
Maj. Harold Francis Bidder, Royal Sussex Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Capt. and Bt. Major George Travers Biggs, Royal Engineers
Capt. David Anderson Bingham, Liverpool Regiment
Lt.-Col. Alexander Harry Colvin Birch, Royal Artillery
Rev. Richard Bird, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Capt. Benedict Birkbeck MC Coldstream Guards
Capt. Norman Pellew Birley MC South Staffordshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. Arthur Birtwistle CMG Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Charles Gamble Bishop, Royal Engineers
Rev. Harry William Blackburne MC MA Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Capt. Frederick St. John Blacker, Rifle Brigade
2nd Lt. Richard Graham Blomfield, Guards, and Royal Flying Corps
Lt.-Col. Herbert Richard Blore, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Maj. George Percy Cosmo Blount, Royal Artillery
Maj. Andrew George Board, South Wales Borderers and Royal Flying Corps
Maj. Edward Leslie Bond, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt.-Col. Francis Henry Borthwick, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Capt. Malcolm Berwick, Dragoons
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Francis Wilford Boteler, Royal Artillery
Maj. Raymond Walter Harry Bourchier, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Major Aubrey Henry Bowden, Machine Gun Corps
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Lionel Boyd Boyd-Moss CMG South Staffordshire Regiment
Capt. Charles Roger Cavendish Boyle, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Capt. Francis Lyndon Bradish, RAMC
Capt. Frederick Hoysted Bradley MB RAMC
Capt. Samuel Glenholme Lennox Bradley MC London Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Albert Newby Braithwaite MC General List
Tmp Lt.-Col. Francis Powell Braithwaite MC Royal Engineers
Capt. Douglas Stephenson Branson MC York & Lancaster Regiment
Capt. Charles Stuart Brebner MD RAMC
Capt. Geoffrey Sydney Brewis, Welsh Regiment
Maj. The Hon. Henry George Orlando Bridgeman MC Royal Artillery
Capt. Havard Noel Bridgwater, Norfolk Regiment
Lt.-Col. Edgar William Brighton CMG Bedfordshire Regiment
Tmp Major Francis Edward Briscoe, Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Major Dyson Brock-Williams, Welsh Regiment
Maj. Nevile Pattullo Brooke, Leinster Regiment
Lt.-Col. John Brown, Norton Regiment
Tmp Major George Edward Allenby Browne MC Liverpool Regiment
Capt. Hugh Swinton Browne, Royal Field Artillery
Company Charles William Brownlow, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. William Fox Bruce MC Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. Thomas Bruce, Royal Artillery
Capt. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Herbert Bryan CMG Manchester Regiment
Maj. Leonard Corfield Bucknall, Yeomanry
Tmp Capt. Christopher Victor Bulstrode MB RAMC
Maj. Richard Seymour Bunbury, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Harold Burchall, Royal Flying Corps Spec. Reserve
Maj. Hubert George Richard Burges-Short, Somerset Light Infantry
Lt.-Col. Arnold Robinson Burrowes CMG Royal Irish Fusiliers
Capt. Christopher Bushell, Royal West Surrey Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Bernard Arnold Barrington Butler, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Major The Hon. Robert Thomas Rowley Probyn Butler MC Tank Corps
Maj. William Erdeswick Ignatius Butler-Bowdon, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry
Lt.-Col. Charles Norman Buzzard, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Walter Roderick Griffith Bye MC General List
Tmp Lt.-Col. The Hon. Antony Schomberg Byng DSO General List and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Major Alexander Francis Somerville Caldwell, North Lancashire Regiment
Maj. Felix Call, Royal Irish Regiment
Tmp Lt.-Col. Ewen Allan Cameron, North Lancashire Regiment
Rev. Edward Fitzhardinge Campbell BA Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Maj. Hector Campbell MVO Indian Army
Maj. The Hon. Ian Malcolm Campbell, Lovat's Scouts
Maj. William Robert Campion MP Royal Sussex Regiment
Lt.-Col. Fernand Gustave Eugene Cannot CMG Army Service Corps
Maj. Alan Douglas Garden, Royal Engineers, and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Lt. D'Arcy Vandeleur Garden, Royal Field Artillery
Rev. Douglas Falkland Carey MA Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Capt. John Charles Denton Carlisle MC London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Thomas Hamilton Carlisle, Royal Engineers
Capt. Thomas Carnwath MB RAMC
Tmp Major Vincent Henry Cartwright, Royal Marine Artillery
Lt.-Col. Trevor Carus-Wilson, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry
Tmp Major Frank Cassels, Royal Sussex Regiment
Capt. Geoffrey Cheetham MC Royal Engineers
Maj. Lawrence Chenevix-Trench, Royal Engineers
Maj. William Francis Christian, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Archibald Christie, Royal Artillery, and Royal Flying Corps
Maj. Henry Robert Stark Christie, Royal Engineers
Maj. Herbert Nicholls Clark, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Frederick Arthur Stanley Clarke, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Denzil Harwood Clarke MC Durham Light Infantry
Lt.-Col. Robert Clarke, Army Service Corps
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Reginald Graham Clarke, Royal West Surrey Regiment, and Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Major Gerald Malcolm Clayton, Liverpool Regiment
Maj. Francis Alfred Worship Cobbold, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. Herbert Philip Gordon Cochran, Middlesex Regiment
Lt.-Col. Edward Webber Warren Cochrane MB RAMC
Maj. Douglas Fanley Colson, Royal Engineers
Maj. Richard Coffey, RAMC
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Edward Sacheverell d'Ewes Coke CMG King's Own Scottish Borderers
Maj. Alfred Methven Collard, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry
Capt. Richard Hamilton Collier, Royal Flying Corps Spec. Reserve
Maj. Reginald Thomas Collins, RAMC
Tmp Major William Alexander Collins, Army Service Corps
Capt. Henry Gordon Comber, unattd. List
Rev. John Morgan Connor MA Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Maj. Dudley Cookes, Royal Field Artillery
Rev. James Ogden Coop MA Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Maj. Frank Sandiford Cooper, Suffolk Regiment
Tmp Lt.-Col. William Coote-Brown, Royal Sussex Regiment
Capt. Edward Roux Littledale Corballis, Royal Dublin Fusiliers, and Royal Flying Corps
Maj. Geoffrey Ronald Codrington, Yeomanry
Capt. and Bt. Major Gordon Philip Lewes Cosens, Dragoons
Maj. Reginald Foulkes Cottrell, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. Miles Rafe Ferguson Courage, Royal Artillery
Maj. Robert Blaster Cousens, Royal Artillery
Maj. Arthur James Cowan, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Major William Henry Coysh, Royal Engineers
Maj. James Craik, Indian Army Lancers
Maj. George Craster, Indian Army Cavalry
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Arthur Julius Craven, Royal Engineers
Tmp Major Edward William Crawford, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Capt. William Loftus Crawford, Lancashire Fusiliers
Rev. Canon Thomas Emerson Crawhall, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Q.M. and Hon. Major Hugh Cressingham, Bedfordshire Regiment
Maj. The Hon. Frederick Heyworth Cripps, Yeomanry
Maj. Sir Morgan George Crofton Bt Life Guards
Maj. John Frank Crombie, RAMC
Maj. Arthur Edwin Cronshaw, Manchester Regiment
Maj. Bernard Cruddas, Northumberland Fusiliers
Capt. Arthur Ludlam Cruickshank, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Major Bertram Stephen Rowsell Cunningham, Army Service Corps
Capt. Richard Robinson Curling, Royal Artillery
Capt. Hubert Montague Cotton-Curtis, North Staffordshire Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Evan Campbell da Costa, East Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Major Thomas William Daniel MC Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Capt. Neville Reay Daniell, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry
Maj. William Augustus Bampfylde Daniel, Royal Horse Artillery
Capt. Markham David, Monmouthshire Regiment, Royal Engineers
Maj. Thomas Jenkins David, Royal Horse Artillery
Maj. Alan Hier Davies, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt.-Col. John Edward Henry Davies, RAMC
Tmp Major Gilbert Davidson, Army Service Corps
Capt. Owen Stanley Davies, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Thomas Henry Davies MC Royal Engineers
Tmp Major William Hathaway Davis MC Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Hugh Frank Dawes MC Royal Fusiliers
Capt. Harold John Dear, London Regiment
Capt. Philip de Fonblanque, Royal Engineers
Tmp Major Thomas Lyttleton de Havilland, Royal Scots Fusiliers (Major, South African Def. Force)
Maj. John Nathael de la Perrelle MC Royal Fusiliers
Capt. James Finlay Dempster, Manchester Regiment
Tmp Capt. Eustace Charles de Neufville, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. and Bt. Major Henry Denison Denison-Pender MC Dragoons
Lt. Col. Bertie Coore Dent, Leicestershire Regiment, Cheshire Regiment
Maj. John Neston Diggle, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Francis Ivan Leslie Ditrcaet MC Durham Light Infantry
Maj. Peter Doig, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Harry Cecil Dolphin, Hampshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Frederick Langloh Donkin, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Alan Sydney Whitehom Dore, Worcestershire Regiment, and Royal Flying Corps
Maj. Francis Holland Dorling, Manchester Regiment
Capt. Edward Cecil Doyle, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Capt. and Bt. Major Reginald John Drake, North Staffordshire Regiment
Maj. Harold Bruce Dresser, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Cecil Francis Drew, Scottish Rifles
Maj. George Barry Drew, West Yorkshire Regiment
Maj. Horace Robert Bawley Drew, Northamptonshire Regiment
Lt. William Stuart Gordon Drummond, Army Service Corps
Maj. Ralph Duckworth, South Staffordshire Regiment
Maj. Robert Maxwell Dudgeon MC Cameron Highlanders
Maj. William Marshall Dugdale, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Capt. Donald Duncan MC Gloucestershire Regiment
Maj. Horace Adrian Doinoan, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Maj. Norman Edwin Dunkerton, RAMC
Capt. Thomas Spence Dunn, Royal Army Medical Service
Maj. Guy Edward Jervoise Durnford, Royal Engineers
Maj. Bernard Alfred Saunders Dyer, Army Service Corps
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Percyvall Hart Dyke, Baluchis, Indian Army
Maj. Gerald Lang Dymott, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Bruce Lindsay Eddis, Royal Engineers
Capt. Harold Walter Edwards MC Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Tmp Major Richard Prior Ferdinand Edwards, Army Service Corps
Capt. William Egan MB RAMC
Capt. Horace Anson Eiloart MC London Regiment
Maj. William Gardiner Eley
Capt. Garrard Elgood, Royal West Kent Regiment
Capt. Edward Charles Ellice (retired), Grenadier Guards
Maj. Edward Halhed Hugh Elliot, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt.-Col. Thomas Renton Elliott, RAMC
Capt. Arthur Addison Ellwood MC Lincolnshire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Lt.-Col. Wilfred Elston MC Manchester Regiment
Maj. Sir Francis Napier Elphinstone-Dalrymple Bt Royal Artillery
2nd Lt. Charles Adrian Ashfoord Elton, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Maj. Robert Emmet, Sr., Yeomanry
Lt.-Gol Cuthbert Evans CMG Royal Artillery
Capt. William Harry Evans, Royal Engineers
Maj. Alfred Howell Evans-Gwynne, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Eliott Nial Evelegh MC Royal Engineers
Capt. Thomas, Swan Eves MB RAMC
Maj. Charles Nicholson. Ewart, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. William Turner Ewing, Royal Scots
Tmp Major John Knox Ewart, Army Service Corps
Tmp Major Cresswell John Eyres, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. Bernard Joseph Fagan, Infantry, Indian Army
Capt. Harold Arthur Thomas Fairbank FRCS RAMC
Lt.-Col. Brereton Fairclough CMG South Lancashire Regiment
Capt. Arthur Wellesley Falconer MD RAMC
Tmp Lt.-Col. Ronald Dundas Falconar-Stewart, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Capt. Arthur Thomas Falwasser, RAMC
Maj. William Alexander Farquhar, Royal Scots Fusiliers
Capt. John Arthur Joseph Farrell, Leinster Regiment
Maj. Paul John Fearon, Royal West Surrey Regiment
Tmp Major Francis Hood Fernie, Tank Corps
Maj. Maurice Christian Festing, Royal Marine Light Infantry
Capt. Linwood Field MC Royal Artillery
Maj. Harold Stuart Filsell, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Maj. John Alexander Findlay, Highland Light Infantry
Maj. Walter Taylor Finlayson, Indian Medical Service
Maj. David Leonard Fisher MB RAMC
Maj. James Thackeray Fisher, Royal Engineers
Tmp Major Arthur Stanley Fitzgerald, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Capt. Edward Herbert Fitzherbert MC Army Service Corps
Capt. Terrick Charles Fitzhugh MVO Royal Irish Regiment
Capt. and Bt. Major Noel Trew Fitzpatrick MC Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. Archibald Nicol Fleming MB FRCS Indian Medical Service
Lt.-Col. Frank Fleming, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Percy Beresford Fleming, Army Service Corps
Capt. The Hon. Gerald William Frederick Savile Foljambe, late Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Maj. Richard Mildmay Foot CMG Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Lt. Stephen Henry Foot, Royal Engineers
Maj. Nowell Barnard de Lancey Forth MC Manchester Regiment
Tmp Capt. William Nelson Foster, Army Service Corps
Maj. Cecil Fowler, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Major George Fox, General List
Rev. Henry Watson Fox, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Capt. The Hon. Alastair Thomas Joseph Fraser, Lovat's Scouts (Cameron Highlanders)
Lt. John Alexander Fraser, Dragoon Guards
Lt.-Col. Thomas Fraser MB RAMC
Capt. The Hon. William Fraser MC Gordon Highlanders
Tmp Major The Hon. Edward Gerald French, General List
Capt. John Roberts Frend, Leinster Regiment
Maj. Charles Gibson Fulton, Royal Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Willoughby Furnivall, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. William Fleetwood Fuller, Yeomanry
Capt. Edward Keith Byrne Furze MC Royal West Surrey Regiment
Maj. Edgar David Galbraith, Indian Army
Maj. Aylmer George Galloway, Army Service Corps
Maj. Robert Leech Galloway, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Charles Edward Galwey, late Royal Irish Regiment
Capt. William Boss Gardner MB RAMC
Maj. William Garforth MC Royal Engineers
Maj. John Reginald Garwood, Royal Engineers
Maj. Henry Percy Garwood, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt.-Col. Cecil Claud Hugh Orby Gascoigne, Worcestershire Regiment
Capt. Eric Gerald Gauntlett MB RAMC
Capt. Cyril Herbert Gay, Royal Artillery
2nd Lt. Frederick George Peter Gedge, Royal Engineers
Capt. William Charles Coleman Gell MC Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Capt. Alfred Joseph Gibbs MC Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Hugh Edward Gibbs, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Capt. Alexander John Gibson, RAMC
Capt. Harold Gibson, RAMC
Tmp Major Joseph Gibson, Army Service Corps
Maj. Lewis Gibson, Royal Highlanders
Tmp Major Donald Hope Gibsone, Royal Engineers
Capt. John Galbraith Gill MC MB RAMC
Maj. Reynold Alexander Gillam, Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. John Gilmour, Jr., Royal Highlanders
Tmp Capt. Sydney Elliot Glendenning, Royal Engineers
Lt. Kenneth Bruce Godsell MC Royal Engineers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Charles Alexander Campbell Godwin, Indian Army Cavalry
Maj. George Edward Goldsmith, Army Service Corps
Tmp Lt.-Col. William Richard Goodwin, Royal Irish Rifles
Maj. Alexander Robert Gisborne Gordon, Royal Irish Regiment
Lt.-Col. George Hamilton Gordon, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Granville Cecil Douglas Gordon, Welsh Guards
Maj. Richard Glegg Gordon, Lowland Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. William Gordon, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Lord Esm Charles Gordon-Lennox MVO Scots Guards
Capt. and Bt. Major Eric Gore-Browne, London Regiment
Lt.-Col. Michael Derwas Goring-Jones CMG Durham Light Infantry
Rev. Thomas Sydney Goudge, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
2nd Lt. Arthur Ernest Gould MC Royal Engineers
Maj. John Maxwell Gover MB RAMC
Capt. Malise Graham, Lancers
Maj. Roland Cecil Douglas Graham, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. Hubert Francis Grant-Suttie MC Royal Artillery
Maj. Bernard Granville, Yeomanry
Lt.-Col. Henry William Grattan, RAMC
Capt. and Bt. Major Stafford Henry Green MC West Yorkshire Regiment
Maj. Wilfrith Gerald Key Green, Indian Army
Tmp Major Frederick Harry Greenhough, Royal Engineers
Maj. William Basil Greenwell, Durham Light Infantry
Maj. Charles Francis Hill Greenwood, London Regiment
Tmp Major Richard Hugo Gregg MC Royal Fusiliers
Capt. William Thornton Huband Gregg, Royal Irish Fusiliers
Capt. George Pascoe Grenfell, Royal Flying Corps
Rev. John Wesley Elnox Griffin MA Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Lt.-Col. Edward Waldegrave Griffith, Royal Artillery
Lt. Edward William Macleay Grigg MC Grenadier Guards
Tmp 2nd Lt. Hugh Noel Grimwade MC General List
Capt. Ewart Scott Grogan, Unattd. List, East African Forces
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Herbert Watkins Grubb, Border Regiment
Tmp Major Frederick Henry Wickham Guard, Royal Scots
Lt.-Col. Frederick Gordon Guggisberg CMG Royal Engineers
Lt. Eric Cecil Guinness, Royal Irish Regiment
Maj. Hamilton Bruce Leverson. Gower Gunn MC Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Arthur Henry Habgood RAMC
Lt.-Col. Bernard Haigh, Army Service Corps
Wing Commander Frederick Crosby Halahan MVO Royal Naval Air Service
Tmp Lt.-Col. Frederick Hall MP Royal Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Robert Sydney Hamilton CMG Army Ordnance Depot
Capt. Denys Huntingford Hammonds MC Royal Engineers
Tmp Major Claude Hancock, Gloucestershire Regiment
Maj. John Haig, Yeomanry
Maj. Mortimer Pawson Hancock, Royal Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. William Charles Hand MC Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Edward Barnard Hanley, Worcestershire Regiment, attd. Tank Corps
Capt. Hubert Arthur Oldfield Hanley, Middlesex Regiment
Lt.-Col. Cathcart Christian Hannay, Dorsetshire Regiment
Capt. Frank Stephen Hanson MC Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Tmp Major Cecil Claud Alexander Hardie, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. George Richardson Harding, Royal Engineers
Capt. Thomas Hubert Harker, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Capt. Charles Harry Hart MC Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. Owen Hart, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Charles Darby Harvey, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Maj. Cosmo George Sinclair Harvey, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Gardiner Hassell Harvey, Army Service Corps
Capt. and Hon. Major John Harvey (retired)
Capt. Percy Lovell Clare Haslam, Hussars, attd. Tank Corps
Maj. Randal Plunkett Taylor Hawksley, Royal Engineers
Capt. James George Hay, late Gordon Highlanders
Capt. Geoffrey Hayes, Durham Light Infantry
Maj. William Burrell Hayley, Royal Horse Artillery
Tmp Lt.-Col. George William Hayward, Royal Field Artillery, Riding Master and Hon. Major (retired)
Lt. Eustace Fellowes Sinclair Hawkins, Army Service Corps
Maj. Thomas Hazelrigg, Army Service Corps
Capt. Cuthbert Morley Headlam, Bedford Yeomanry
Maj. Arthur Basset Hearle, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. GeorgeNoah Heath, Cheshire Regiment
Capt. Joseph Thomas Heath MC Royal Engineers
Maj. Vincent James Heather, Royal Artillery
Capt. Alfred George Hebblethwaite, RAMC
Maj. Fercival John Beresford Heelas, Royal Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Harry Dal ton Henderson, Army Service Corps
Lt.-Col. Lionel Lees Hepper, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. William Francis Hessey, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Capt. Charles Caulfield Hewitt MC Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers, and Machine Gun Corps
Maj. Gerald Heygate, Royal Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Sir Graham Percival Heywood Bt 1st Staffordshire Yeomanry
Tmp Lt. Herbert John Hill, Royal Engineers
Maj. Rowland Clement Ridley Hill, Royal Engineers
Maj. Francis Barrett Hills, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt.-Col. Harry Alexander Hinge CMG RAMC
Capt. and Temp Major Charles Faunce Hitchins, Royal West Kent Regiment
Col. Reginald Hoare, 4th Hussars
Tmp Major Harry Roy Hobson, Army Service Corps
Capt. Adam Hodgins, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Lt.-Col. William Holdsworth Holdsworth Hunt, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Henry Arthur Hollond, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Major Francis John Courtenay Hood, York & Lancaster Regiment
Maj. John Charles Hooper, Shropshire Light Infantry
Capt. and Bt. Major Robert Victor Galbraith Horn MC Royal Scots Fusiliers
Maj. George John Houghton, RAMC
Lt.-Col. John William Hobart, Houghton MB RAMC
Capt. Charles Kenneth Howard-Bury, King's Royal Rifle Corps Spec. Reserve
Lt.-Col. Walter Howell Jones, Royal Garrison Artillery
Q.M. and Hon. Major James Thomas Harold Hudson, Middlesex Regiment
Tmp Capt. Henry Moore Hudspeth MC Royal Engineers
Capt. Basil Hughes MB FRCS RAMC
Maj. Edward William Hughes MC London Regiment
Maj. William Hughes MC London Regiment
Maj. Henry Horne Hulton, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Walter Vernon Hume, South Lancashire Regiment
Maj. George Noel Humphreys, Army Service Corps
Maj. Rochford Noel Hunt MB RAMC
Maj. Reginald Seager Hunt, Dragoon Guards
Capt. Cecil Stuart Hunter, Royal Artillery
Tmp Major Hugh Blackburn Hunter, Army Service Corps
Maj. Henry Noel Alexander Hunter, Royal West Surrey Regiment
Tmp Lt.-Col. Arthur Reginald Hurst, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Ralph Hamer Husey MC London Regiment
Capt. Colin Ross Marshall Hutchison MC Royal Field Artillery
Q.M. and Hon. Major Thomas Charles Ibbs, London Regiment
Lt.-Col. Henry Wilson Iles, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Bernhardt Basil von Brumsy im Thurn MC Hampshire Regiment
Maj. Charles Elliott Inglis, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Major Richard Inglis, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Maj. Thomas Stewart Inglis, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt.-Col. Arthur Innes Irons, Middlesex Regiment
Capt. Noel Mackintosh Stuart Irwin MC Essex Regiment
Maj. William Rennie Izat, Royal Engineers
Capt. Edward Darby Jackson, King's Own Scottish Borderers
Tmp Major Frank Whitford Jackson, Army Service Corps
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Herbert William Jackson, Indian Army
Maj. Richard Rolt Brash Jackson, Army Service Corps
Maj. Arthur Lawrence Baldwin Jacob, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Major Archibald Hugh James, Northumberland Fusiliers, West Yorkshire Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Ralph Ernest Haweis James CMG North Lancashire Regiment
Maj. Cyril Jarrett, Middlesex Regiment
Tmp Capt. Arthur Alfred Jayne MC Royal Engineers
Maj. Richard Griffith Bassett Jeffreys, Royal Dublin Fusiliers
Maj. Leoline Jenkins MC Dorset, Royal Garrison Artillery and Royal Flying Corps
Maj. Sir Walter Kentish William Jenner Bt late 9th Lancers
Lt.-Col. Arthur Stawell Jenour CMG Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. Arthur Baynes Johnson, Lincolnshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. Allen Victor Johnson, Royal Fusiliers, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Tmp Major Benjamin Sandford Johnson, Army Service Corps
Maj. Victor Neville Johnson, Gloucestershire Regiment
Tmp Lt.-Col. Frederick Campbell Johnston, Royal Artillery
Maj. George Bernard Johnson, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt.-Col. William Hamilton Hall Johnston MC Middlesex Regiment
Maj. Harry Haweis Joll MC Royal Artillery
Maj. Archibald Nelson Gavin Jones, Indian Army
Lt.-Col. John Josselyn, Suffolk Regiment
Capt. Edward James Kavanagh MC MB RAMC
Maj. Thomas Kay MB RAMC
Maj. Gerard Ainslie Kompthorne, RAMC
Capt. and Bt. Major Edward Holt Kendrick, Royal Dublin Fusiliers
Maj. William Kennedy, East African Veterinary Corps
Lt. Albert Edmund Kent MC Leicestershire Regiment
Maj. John Kent, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Herbert Edward Kenyon, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Major John Victor Kershaw, East Lancashire Regiment
Maj. Sidney Hardinge Kershaw, Northumberland Fusiliers
Lt. Francis Percy Kindell MC Royal Artillery
Maj. Charles Harold Kilner, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Robert Edgar Kilvert, Royal Marine Artillery
Tmp Capt. Charles Francis King MC Cheshire Regiment
Capt. Frank King, 4th Hussars
Tmp Major John Bussell King, Army Service Corps
Tmp Major Wentworth Alexander King-Harman (retired) List, late Royal Irish Rifles
Maj. Guy Thornhill Kingsford, Royal Engineers
Capt. John Lawson Kinnear MC Liverpool Regiment and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Lt.-Col. Lewis Hawker Kirkness, Special List
Maj. Harry Fearnley Kirkpatrick, East Kent Regiment
Tmp Major Leonard Knapman, Army Service Corps
Maj. Charles Leycester Knyvett MC Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt.-Col. Robert Kyle, Highland Light Infantry
Maj. Wilham Frederick Robert Kyngdon, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. Roderick Laing MC Seaforth Highlanders
Maj. James Laird, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Ronald Dewe Lake, Northamptonshire Regiment
Tmp Major George Moorsom Lagier Lamotte, Royal Engineers
Capt. John du Plessis Langrishe MB RAMC
Maj. John Henry Langton, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Maj. Percy Edward Langworthy Parry, London Regiment
Maj. Sir Thomas Perceval Larcom Bt Royal Artillery
Capt. Stanley Dermott Large MC RAMC
Capt. The Hon. Edward Cecil Lascelles MC Rifles Brigade
Mag Charles Trevor Lawrence, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Geoffrey Lawrence, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Hervey Major Lawrence, Scottish Rifles
Capt. Arthur Bertram Layton, South Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Major Ralph le Butt, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Victor Carmichael Leckie, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Maj. Guy Lee MC East Kent Regiment
Capt. George Maconchy Lee MC Royal Fusiliers
Maj. Harry Romer Lee, 20th Hussars
Maj. Edward Frederick William Lees, Royal Engineers
Maj. Alexander Leggat MB RAMC
Capt. Charles Edward Lembcke, Northumberland Fusiliers
Maj. Frederick Joseph Lemon, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Major Dudley Lewis MC York & Lancaster Regiment
Lt.-Col. Philip Edward Lewis, Royal Artillery
Capt. Wilfred Gordon Lindsell MC Royal Artillery
Capt. Christopher George Ling MC Royal Engineers
Maj. Harold Cronshaw Lings, Manchester Regiment
Tmp Lt. The Hon. Charles Christopher Josceline Littleton, Middlesex Regiment
Lt. William Howard Livens MC Royal Engineers
Maj. Evan Henry Llewellyn, King's African Rifles
Maj. Evan Colclough Lloyd, Royal Irish Regiment
Lt. Ormond Maxwell Loggie MC Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Kenneth Thurston Lomas, Royal Engineers
Maj. Thomas Longbottom, West Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Charles Alexander Holcombe Longcroft, Welsh Regiment
Capt. Henry Kerr Longman MC late Gordon Highlanders
Lt.-Col. William Loring, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. Stuart Gilkinson Love MC
Maj. John Gordon Lowndes, late North Lancashire Regiment
Capt. Henry Charles Loyd MC Coldstream Guards
Tmp Major Lowes Dalbiac Luard, Army Service Corps
Maj. Williams Ludgate, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Capt. and Bt. Major Edgar Rainey Ludlow-Hewitt MC Royal Irish Rifles
Maj. Cecil St. John Lynch, Royal Engineers
Capt. Jasper Beverley Lynch, late 12th Cavalry, Indian Army
Local Major Frank Sanderson Lyster, Special List
Maj. Archibald Laird MacConnell, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Capt. Harold Symes MacDonald MC Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Major James Leslie Auld Macdonald, Royal Scots
Lt.-Col. Reginald James Macdonald, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. John Buchanan MacFarlan, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Fane Andrew James Macfarlane, London Regiment
Maj. Walter Macfarlane, Glasgow Yeomanry
Capt. Fraoicis Burnett Mackenzie MC Royal Scots
Maj. Pierse Joseph Mackesy MC Royal Engineers
Capt. and Bt. Major William Alexander Onslow Churchill Mackintosh, Royal Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Charles Alexander Hugh MacLean, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Maj. Charles Wilberforce MacLean, Cameron Highlanders
Tmp Major Adam Gordon MacLeod, Army Service Corps
Capt. Donald Macleod MC North Staffordshire Regiment
Maj. Malcolm Neynoe MacLeod MC Royal Engineers
Lt. Mind en Whyte Melville MacLeod, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. and Bt. Major Patrick Dalmahoy McCandlish, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Maj. William McCall MB RAMC
Maj. Robert Singleton McClintock, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Ivor Herbert McClure, Intelligence Corps
Lt. Hamilton McCombie MC Worcestershire Regiment
Capt. William McKim Herbert McCullagh MC MB RAMC
Capt. and Bt. Major James Innis Aikin McDiarmid, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Gordon Archibald McLarty MB RAMC
Maj. Norman Macdonald McLeod MC Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Hugh McMaster MC Royal Artillery
Capt. Donald Jay McMullen, Royal Engineers
Capt. John William McNee MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. George Maitland Edwards, Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. George Alexander Malcolm, Reserve, attd. London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Stuart Sydney Mallinson MC Royal Engineers
Capt. John Alexander Manifold MB RAMC
Capt. Lionel Manton, Royal Engineers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Arthur Henry Marindin, Royal Highlanders
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Cecil Colvile Marindin, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Bryan Lister Marrmer, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. John Francis Harnsor Marsh, Hampshire Regiment
Capt. Alfred Russel Marshall MC Royal Engineers
Capt. Charles Frederick Kelk Marshall MC Royal Field Artillery
Hon. Major Henry Alfred Marshall, Army Ordnance Depot
Tmp Major Ernest Brasewhite Martin, Royal Engineers
Maj. Daniel Johnstone Mason, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Malcolm Forty Mason, Suffolk Regiment
Capt. Charles Walter Massy MC Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Reginald Cosway Matthews, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Tmp Lt.-Col. William Riddell Matthews, RAMC
Lt. Hugh Patrick Guarm Maule MC Honourable Artillery Company
Maj. William John Maule, Essex Regiment
Lt.-Col. Herbert Blair Mayne, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. John Maxwell MC Rifle Brigade
Lt.-Col. James McCall Maxwell CB Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt.-Col. Robert David Perceval-Maxwell, Royal Irish Rifles
Maj. Sydmey Manvers Woolner Meadows, RAMC
Maj. Cyril Frankland Meares, Royal Irish Fusiliers
Maj. Teignmouth Philip Melvil, Lancers
Tmp Major David Kinloch Michie, Highland Light Infantry
Capt. George Waterston Miller, RAMC
Maj. Hubert Garrett Blair Miller MC Royal Scots Fusiliers
Rev. William Herbert Latimer Miller BA Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Maj. John Williamson Milligan, East Africa Supply Corps
Capt. George Ernest Millner MC London Regiment
Rev. Eric Milner Milner-White, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Maj. Cecil Francis Milsom, Army Service Corps
Tmp Col. Thomas Herbert Minshall, General List
Maj. Arthur Mitchell, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. Archibald Madame Mitchell, Royal Scots
Capt. Charles Mitchell, Grenadier Guards
Capt. William Gore Sutherland Mitchell MC Highland Light Infantry
Tmp Major Thomas Hassard Montgomery, Army Service Corps
Maj. Edward Duke Moore, East Riding Yeomanry
Maj. Edward Henry Milner Moore, RAMC
Lt.-Col., George Abraham Moore CMG RAMC
Maj. Charles Robert Faulconer Morgan, Army Service Corps
Maj. Thomas Bettesworth Moriarty, RAMC
Lt.-Commander Edward N. Groves Morris, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, attd. Royal Naval Air Service
Maj. Jolm Hugh Morris, Army Service Corps
Lt.-Col. and Bt. Col. Frederick Lansdowne Morrison CB Highland Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Robert Charles Stuart Morrison-Scott, Royal Marine Artillery
Lt.-Col. Sidney Pelham Morter, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Major Albert Isaac Mossop, attd. Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Lt.-Col. Hugh Crawford Moultrie, Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. Charles Carter Moxon CMG Yorkshire Light Infantry
Tmp Major John Carr Muriel, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Capt. Edward Lionel Mussor MC Manchester Regiment
Maj. Lenox Arthur Dutton, Naper, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Henry Edmund Palmer-Nash, Royal Scots
Maj. Roderick Macaulay Bernard Needhan, Suffolk Regiment
Capt. Duncan Ferguson Dempsterr Neill, Royal Engineers
Capt. Redmond Barry Neill, Royal Irish Fusiliers
Lt.-Col. Richard Austin Nevill, Royal Engineers
Maj. Gervys Charles Nevile, Royal Field Artillery
Maj.-Thomas Clifford Newbold, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Maj. Edward Hills Nicholson, Royal Fusiliers
Capt. Hugh Blomfield Nicholson, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Maj. Cecil Paterson Nickalls, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. John, Scott Nimmo, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Maj. Samuel Richard Normand, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. Arthur Ernest Norton, West Indian Regiment
Tmp Lt.-Col. William Kilminster Notley
Tmp Major Allan Vaughan Nutt, York & Lancaster Regiment
Tmp Major Norman Henry Nutt, Tank Corps
Lt.-Col. William Coope Gates, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Tmp Lt.-Col. Henry Rogham O'Brien, Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. William Tasker Odam, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Major Richard John Lanford O'Donoghue, Army Service Corps
Tmp Lt.-Col. Robert James Leslie Ogilby, London Regiment
Maj. David Ogilvy, Royal Engineers
Tmp Major Bernardine O'Gorman, General List
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Gerald Maxwell Orr, Lancers
Lt.-Col. Lewis James Osborn, Royal Artillery, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. George Cecil Rudall Overton, Royal Fusiliers
Capt. Lindsay Cunliffe Owen, Royal Engineers
Tmp Major Norman Henry Oxenham, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. and Bt. Major Bernard Charles Tolver-Paget MC Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Rev. Reginald Palmer MC Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Maj. Thomas Kenyon Pardoe, Worcestershire Regiment
Maj. James Dove Park, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Albert Chevallier-Parker, Special List
Capt. George Singleton Parkinson, RAMC
Maj. Henry Evan Pateshall, Herefordshire Regiment
Maj. Sir Everard Philip Digby Pauncefort-Duncombe Bt Buckinghamshire Yeomanry
Maj. Denys Whitmore Payne MC Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Herbert Gerald Payne, General List
Maj. Hugh Drummond Pearson, Royal Engineers
Maj. Thomas William Pearson, Royal Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. William Carmichael Peebles, Royal Scots
Capt. Home Peel MC London Regiment
Local Major Willoughby Ewart Peel, Camel Transport Corps
Tmp Capt. Albert James Pelling MC Royal Engineers
Rev. Douglas Raymond Pelly, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Hon. Lt. Bertie Howard Penn, Army Ordnance Depot
Lt.-Col. Frederick Septimus Penny CMG MB RAMC
Tmp Major William Petty, Seaforth Highlanders
Capt. Ernest Cyril Phelan MC MB RAMC
Lt.-Col. Henry Ramsay Phipps, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Major William John Phythian-Adams MC Royal Fusiliers
Capt. Jocelyn Arthur Adair Pickard, Royal Engineers
Maj. Frederick Alfred Pile MC Royal Artillery
Capt. John Ryland Pisent, Royal Engineers
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. William Richard Pinwill, Liverpool Regiment
Tmp Major Oswald Bertram Fisher Planck, Army Service Corps
Lt. Ian Stanley Ord Playfair MC Royal Engineers
Maj. Thomas Herman Plummer, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. James Frederick Plunkett MC Royal Irish Regiment
Capt. Alexander Morton Pollard, RAMC
Capt. Robert Valentine Pollok, Irish Guards
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Cyril Lachlan Porter, East Kent Regiment
Capt. James Herbert Porter, North Staffordshire Regiment
Maj. Edward Charles Pottinger, Royal Artillery
Maj. Eden Bernard Powell, Rifles
Brig Lt.-Col. Edgar Elkin Powell, RAMC
Tmp Major Randolph MacHattie Powell, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. Thomas Power, M.L.B.
Maj. Henry Royds Pownall MC Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Major Albert Ernest Prescott, Royal Engineers
Maj. Classon O'Driscoll Preston, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Walter Clavel Herbert Prichard, Royal Engineers
Maj. Peregrine Prince, Shropshire Light Infantry
Tmp Major Edward Robert Seymour Prior MC South Lancashire Regiment
Lt. Percy William Prockter, Army Service Corps
Maj. Demson Pudsey, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Richard Brownlow Purey-Cust MC Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Alfred Hutton Radice, Gloucestershire Regiment, South Wales Borderers
Capt. Rowan Scrope Rait Kerr MC Royal Engineers
Capt. Gerard Marland Rambaut, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. James Gordon Ramsay, Cameron Highlanders
Capt. and Bt. Major Algernon Lee Ransome MC Dorsetshire Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Cecil Godfrey Rawling CMG CIE Somerset Light Infantry
Capt. John George Grey Rea, Yeomanry
Maj. Robert Clanmalier Reeves, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Charles Savile Reid, Royal Engineers
Lt. Henry Thomas Rendell, Army Service Corps
Tmp Major John Walter Keyell, Royal Engineers
Capt. John Phillip Rhodes, Royal Engineers
Maj. Ernest Evelyn Rich, Royal Horse Artillery
Tmp Capt. John Frederick Gwyther Richards MB RAMC
Maj. Gerald Arthur Richards MC Royal Artillery
Maj. George Carr Richardson MC Royal Artillery
Lt.-Col. Robert Buchanan Riddell, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Major The Hon. Harold Ritchie, Scottish Rifles
Lt.-Col. Colin McLeod Robertson, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. Frank Mansfield Boileau Robertson, Royal Highlanders
Maj. William Cairnes Robertson, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Robert William Barrington Robertson-Eustace, East African Forces
Maj. Annesley Craven Robinson, Army Service Corps
Maj. John Armstrong Purefoy Robinson, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. Thomas Chambers Robinson, East Lancashire Regiment
Maj. Cyril Edmund Alan Spencer Rocke, Irish Guards
Maj. Harold Bowyer Roffey, Lancashire Fusiliers
Tmp Major Myles Herbert Roffey, Welsh Regiment
Maj. Walter Lacy Yea Rogers, Royal Horse Artillery
Tmp Major Norman Thomas Rolls, Royal West Surrey Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Claudo Stuart Rome, 11th Hussars
Maj. Everard Howe Rooke, Royal Engineers
Capt. Edward Ridgill Roper MC Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Robert Knox Ross MC Royal West Surrey Regiment
Maj. William Edward Rothwell, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Maj. Wilfred Barton Rowe, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt.-Col. Frank George
Mathias Rowley CMG Middlesex Regiment
Lt. Albert Russell, Royal Engineers
Col. Bruce Bremner Russell
Maj. Noel Hunsley Campbell Russell, Leinster Regiment, and Worcestershire Yeomanry
Tmp Major William Malcolm Russell, General List
Maj. William Thomas Cutler Rust, Army Service Corps
Maj. Hugh Thomas Ryan, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Capt. Julian Neil Oscar Rycroft MC Royal Highlanders
Maj. Harold Francis Salt, Royal Artillery
Maj. Edward Vipan Sarson, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Lionel Robert Schuster, Liverpool Regiment
Tmp Major Albert Edward Scothern, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Capt. John Davie Scott, Royal Irish Regiment
Capt. John Walter Lennox Scott, RAMC
Maj. William Scott-Elliot, Army Service Corps
Maj. Hugh Forde Searight, 1st Dragoon Guards
Tmp Major Frank Searle, Tank Corps
Maj. Thomas Byrne Sellar CMG late King's Own Scottish Borderers
Capt. Hugh Garden Seth-Smith, Army Service Corps
Capt. Reginald Henry Napier-Settle MC 19th Hussars
Maj. Evelyn Francis Edward-Seymour, Royal Dublin Fusiliers
Maj. Roger Cecil Seys, Royal Artillery
Capt. Arthur Talbot Shakespear MC Royal Engineers
Capt. and Bt. Major George Frederick Cortland Shakespear MC Indian Army
Maj. Charles Schmidt Sharpe, York & Lancaster Regiment
Tmp Major William Shaw, Army Service Corps
Maj. Henry Francis Shea MB RAMC
Capt. Charles Edward Gowran Shearman MC Bedfordshire Regiment
Tmp Major Robert Austin Shebbeare, Army Service Corps
Capt. John Reginald Vivian Sherston MC Cavalry Indian Army
Capt. William John Townsend Shorthose, South Staffordshire Regiment, and King's African Rifles
Maj. Cecil Barrow Simonds, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. William ArthurJohn Simpson MC Royal Field Artillery
Maj. James Robert Simson, Highland Light Infantry
Rev. Patrick Sinclair MA Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Maj. Alexander Baird Skinner, Indian Army Cavalry
Q.M. and Hon. Major Edmund William Skinner, Lincolnshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. Edward Wheeler Slayter CMG RAMC
Maj. Arthur John Henry Sloggett, Rifle Brigade
Capt. Lovell Francis Smeathman MC Hertfordshire Regiment
Capt. Arthur Francis Smith MC Coldstream Guards
Capt. Isham Percy Smith, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. William Selwyn Smith, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Gerald James Watt Smyth, Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. Henry Smyth, Cheshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. George Abraham Smyth, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Rupert Caesar Smythe, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Lt. William Fulton Somervail MC Scottish Rifles
Capt. Herbert George Sotheby, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Lt.-Col. Charles Louis Spencer, Royal Engineers
Capt. Hugh Baird Spens, Scottish Rifles
Tmp Capt. Alfred William Speyer, General List, late West Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. Sidney Stallard, London Regiment
Hon. Capt. Alfred Richard Stamford, Army Ordnance Depot
Maj. The Hon. Oliver Hugh Stanley, Royal Artillery
Tmp Major William Alan Stanley, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Arthur Christopher Lancelot Stanley-Clarke, Scottish Rifles
Maj. William Lockhart St. Clair, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Major William Jones Steele, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt.-Col. Arthur Stephenson MC Royal Scots
Lt.-Col. Henry Kenyon Stephenson Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Charles Knowles Steward MC South Wales Borderers
Tmp Major Albert Lewis Stewart, Machine Gun Corps
Maj. William Murray Stewart, Cameron Highlanders
Capt. and Bt. Major Walter Robert Stewart MC Rifle Brigade
Capt. Alexander Dickson Stirling MB RAMC
Capt. Colin Robert Hoste Stirling MC Scottish Rifles
Maj. Walter Andrew Starling MC Royal Artillery
Maj. William Eustace St. John, Yeomanry
Maj. Ashton Alexander St. Hill, West Riding Regiment
Capt. Hugh Morton Stobart, Yeomanry
Tmp Capt. Adrian Stokes MD FRCS RAMC
Cat Henry Howard Stoney, North Staffordshire Regiment
Maj. Martyn Rogers Strover, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. Edward Lisle Strutt, Royal Scots
Maj. Francis Cyril Rupert Studd, East Kent Regiment
Tmp Major Montague Alfred Sliney Sturt, Army Service Corps
Lt.-Col. Charles William Swinton, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. William Frederick John Symonds, London Regiment
Tmp Major Henry Leslie Aldersey Swann, Army Service Corps
Capt. Ernest John Bocart Tagg, Royal Marine Light Infantry
Tmp 2nd Lt. Bruce Mitchell Taylor MC Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry
Maj. Charles Lancaster Taylor, South Wales Borderers
Maj. Glenleigh John Schill Taylor, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. George Pritchard Taylor MC MB RAMC
Maj. Henry Jeffreys Taylor, Durham Light Infantry
Capt. George Harris Teall, Lincolnshire Regiment
Capt. and Bt. Major Richard Durand Temple, Worcestershire Regiment
Capt. James Hugh Thomas MB RAMC
Lt.-Col. Henry Melville Thomas CMG Royal Artillery
Tmp Major Basil Thomas, Gloucestershire Regiment
Tmp Lt.-Col. Albert Charles Thompson, Royal Dublin Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Claude Ernest Thompson MC South Lancashire Regiment
Maj. Cyril Henry Farrer Thompson, London Regiment
Maj. James George Coulthered Thompson, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. William Irwin Thompson MB RAMC
Capt. George Thomson MC Yorkshire Light Infantry
Maj. George Edward Mervyn Thorneycroft, Royal Artillery
Maj. Cudbert John Massey Thornhill, Indian Army
Lt.-Col. Arthur Hugh Thorp, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt.-Col. John Claude Thorp, Army Ordnance Depot
Lt. Alexander Tillett MC Devonshire Regiment
Maj. Clement Thurstan Tomes MC Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Capt. Julian Latham Tomlin, Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. Francis William Towsey CMG West Yorkshire Regiment
Maj. Edmund Francis Tarlton Traill, Army Service Corps
Maj. John Brereton Owst Trimble MC Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Major Frederick George Trobridge, General List
Capt. Gerald Louis Johnson Tuck, Unattd. List, attd. Suffolk Regiment
Lt.-Col. Donald Fiddes Tulloch, Royal Artillery
Maj. Canning Turner, Leicestershire Regiment
Capt. Reginald Aubrey Turner MC Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Clifford Charles Horace Twiss, East Yorkshire Regiment
Maj. Weratwarth Francis Tyndale CMG MD RAMC
Capt. William Tyrrell MC MB RAMC
Maj. Thurlo Richardson Ubsdell, late Royal Artillery
Maj. John Salusbury Unthank, Durham Light Infantry
Lt. James Alastair Berry Urquhart, Royal Garrison Artillery
Rev. George Ross Vallings, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Capt. Sir Harry Calvert Williams Verney Bt General List
Maj. Leonard Morris Verney FRCVS Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Q.M. and Hon. Major George Edward Vickers, Manchester Regiment
Lt. Oliver G. G. Villiers, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, attd. Royal Naval Air Service
Maj. Patrick Villiers-Stuart, Royal Fusiliers
Maj. Ernest Blechynden Waggett MB RAMC
Lt.-Col. Arthur Reginald Wainewright, Royal Artillery
Maj. Roland Henry Waithman, Royal Sussex Regiment
Tmp Capt. George Goold Walker MC Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. and Bt. Major Charles John Wallace MC Highland Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. James Hardress de Warrenne Waller, Royal Engineers
Maj. Hubert de Lansey Walters, Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. Harold Mathias Arthur Ward Royal Garrison Artillery
Maj. Joseph Ward, RAMC
Maj. George William Webb Ware MB RAMC
Maj. Henry Archibald Waring, Royal West Kent Regiment
Maj. Lionel Edward Warren, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Edward Robert Cabell Warrens, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Philip Huskinson Warwick, Yeomanry
Maj. James Way MC Royal Artillery
Tmp Major Harry Reginald Bland Wayman, Northumberland Fusiliers
Maj. Adrian Barclay Wayte, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Q.M. and Hon. Major Walter Edward Webb, London Regiment
Capt. Ronald Moree Weeks MC South Lancashire Regiment
Maj. Barrington Clement Wells, Essex Regiment
Capt. Richard Annesley West, Yeomanry
Lt.-Col. Frederick Malcolm Westropp, Royal Engineers
Maj. Frederick Whalley MB RAMC
Tmp Major Wynn Powell Wheldon, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Maj. William Stobart Whetherly, Hussars
Capt. Arthur Percy Buncombe Whitaker, Army Service Corps
Charles Richardson White, Army Medical Corps
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Frank Augustin Kinder, White, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Noel Blanco White MC General List
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. The Hon. Robert White CMG Reserve of Officers
Lt.-Col. Edmund l'Estrange Whitehead, Royal Artillery
Tmp Major Hector Fraser Whitehead, East Lancashire Regiment
Lt.-Col. Edward Nathan Whitley CMG Royal Artillery
Maj. Everard le Grice Whitting MC Royal Artillery
Tmp Major Alan Roderick Whittington, Army Service Corps
Lt. William Henry Whyte, Royal Dublin Fusiliers
Capt. Harold Hartley Wilberforce, Army Service Corps
Maj. Edward Harold Wildblood, Leinster Regiment
Lt. Cyril Francis Wilkins MC Royal Irish Rifles
Tmp Major Harris Vaughan Wilkinson, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. James Lugard Willcocks MC Royal Highlanders
Capt. Henry Beresford Dennitts Willcox MC Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Maj. George Arthur Seccombe Williams, South Staffordshire Regiment (Spec. Reserve)
Maj. Herbert Mamwanng Williams, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Rev. Ronald Charles Lambert Williams, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt.-Col. Frederick George Willock, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Albert Edward Jacob Wilson, Somerset Light Infantry
Maj. Donald Clitheroe Wilson, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Douglas Hamilton Wilson, General List
Maj. James Herbert Roche Winder MD RAMC
Capt. Gordon Bluett Winch, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Godfrey Harold Fenton Wingate, Royal Scots
Tmp Lt.-Col. Ernest Arthur Winter MC Royal Fusiliers
Lt.-Col. William Maunder Withycombe CMG Yorkshire Light Infantry
Maj. James Wood, RAMC
Capt. Wilfred James Woodcock, Lancashire Fusiliers
Capt. William Talbot Woods MC Manchester Regiment
Maj. Robart James Wordsworth, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Maj. Percy Reginald Worrall MC Devonshire Regiment
Maj. Stephen Henry Worrrall, Border Regiment
Capt. Andrew Rae Wright MB RAMC
Maj. Hubert Howard Wright, Army Service Corps
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Wallace Duffield Wright VC CMG Royal West Surrey Regiment
Maj. William Oswald Wright, Royal Lancaster Regiment
Lt.-Col. Arthur Oliver Bird Wroughton, RAMC
Capt. Jasper William George Wyld MC Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Maj. Guy George Egerton Wylly VC Indian Army
Tmp Major Charles Sandford Wynne-Eyton, General List, and Royal Flying Corps
Maj. Cecil McGrigor Yates, Royal Artillery
Maj. Robert James Burton Yates, Indian Army Cavalry
Maj. Richard Lister York, Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Arthur Allan Shakespear Younger, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. James Allardyce MM London Regiment
Maj. Arthur Harold Bibby, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Patrick Dick Booth MC Royal Field Artillery
Capt. and Bt. Major Austin Hanbury Brown MC Royal Engineers
Lt. Frederick Arthur Montague Browning, Grenadier Guards
Tmp Capt. Ferguson Fitton Carr-Harris MD RAMC
2nd Lt. Joseph Percy Castle, West Riding Regiment
Tmp Major Vernon Douglas Robert Conlan, Army Service Corps
Maj. Anthony Courage MC Hussars
Maj. Murray Heathneld Dendy MC Royal Artillery
Lt. Andrew May Duthie, London Regiment
Lt. William Maurice Evans, South Wales Borderers
Capt. Charles Robert Gerard, Grenadier Guards
Capt. Philip Mannock Glasier, London Regiment
Lt. Tom Goodall, West Riding Regiment
2nd Lt. Guthrie Hallsmith, Suffolk Regiment
Lt. John Steven Hamilton, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. John Eliot Hancock, Norfolk Regiment
Capt. James Francis Harter MC Royal Fusiliers
Lt. Cyril Walter Holcroft, Worcestershire Regiment
Capt. Herbert Selwyn Jackson, West Riding Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. William George James, Yorkshire Light Infantry
2nd Lt. William Joffe, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Capt. Kenneth Alfred Johnston, Hampshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Edward Spurin Knight, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Charles Robert Lucas, Royal Lancaster Regiment
Lt. Alfred Cecil Lynn, Yorkshire Light Infantry
2nd Lt. John Francis Maginn, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Francis Morgan Mathias, Welsh Regiment
2nd Lt. James Thomas Byford McCudden MC General List, and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Andrew Edward McKeever MC Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Major David Watts Morgan, Labour Corps
Capt. and Bt. Major The Hon. Thomas George
Breadalbane TVtorgan-Grenville-Gavin MC Rifle Brigade
Lt. Charles Stone Moxon, West Riding Regiment
Maj. Sir Christopher William Nixon Bt Royal Artillery
2nd Lt. James Partridge Notman, Seaforth Highlanders
2nd Lt. Gerald O'Brien, Royal Munster Fusiliers
Maj. Cecil Henry Pank, Middlesex Regiment
2nd Lt. William Paul MC West Yorkshire Regiment
2nd Lt. James Peel MM Royal Fusiliers
Maj. Gilbert Sandford Poole, Yeomanry
Maj. Rowland Edward Power, East Kent Regiment
Tmp Major John Brenchley Rosher MC Durham Light Infantry
Maj. Charles Frank Rundall, Royal Engineers
Lt.-Col. George Gray Russell, King Edward's Horse
Lt.-Col. Cecil John Herbert Spence-Jones, Yeomanry
Maj. Charles Arthur Algernon Stidson MD RAMC
Capt. and Bt. Major John Alexander Stirling MC Scots Guards
Tmp Major Leycester Penrhyn Storr, Liverpool Regiment
Lt. Gerald Fitzgerald-Stuart, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Edwin Tillotson, West Yorkshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Elliot Clarke Tuckey, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Arthur Upton, Wiltshire Regiment
Tmp Lt.-Col. Herbert Lawton Warden, East Surrey Regiment
Lt. Guy Randolph Westmacott, Grenadier Guards
Capt. and Bt. Major Bevil Thomson Wilson, Royal Engineers
Australian Imperial Force
Maj. Alan Sinclair Durvall Barton, Army Medical Corps
Maj. Thomas Harold Bird, Light Horse Regiment
Lt.-Col. Jaanes Jamison Black, Army Medical Corps
Lt.-Col. William Brazenor, Infantry
Maj. William Francis Noel Bridges, Infantry
Lt.-Col. Samuel Roy Burston, Army Medical Corps
Maj. David Duncan Jade, Army Medical Corps
Lt.-Col. Herbert Gordon Carter, Pioneer Battalion
Maj. Richard Gardiner Casey MC Infantry
Maj. Clement Lorne Chapman, Army Medical Corps
Maj. Alexander Chisholm, Light Horse Regiment
Maj. Walter Churchus, Field Artillery
Maj. Eric Winfield Connelly, Infantry
Tmp Lt.-Col. James Montague Christian Corlette, Engineers
Maj. John Joseph Corngan, Infantry
Maj. Tannatt William Edgeworth David CMG Engineers
Lt.-Col. William Joihn Stevens Davidson, Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Michael Henry Downey, Army Medical Corps
Lt.-Col. Richard Dowse, Staff
Lt.-Col. Edmund Alfred Drake Broekman CMG Infantry
Lt.-Col. Bernard Oscar Charles Duggan, Infantry
Maj. Percy Malcolm Edwards, Field Artillery
Maj. William Gordon Farquhar, Engineers
Maj. Hubert Cedric Ford, Infantry
Maj. William Reginald Rogers Ffrench MC Machine Gun Corps
Maj. Vivian Harold Gatliff, Field Artillery
Maj. Richard Stewart Gee, Field Artillery
Capt. Henry James Hill Glover, Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Henry Arthur Goddard, Infantry
Maj. John Leslie Hardie, General List
Maj. James Douglas Henry, Engineers
Lt.-Col. Ernest Edward Herrod, Infantry
Lt.-Col. William Alexander Henderson, Pioneer Battalion
Maj. Max Henry, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Maj. Basil Holmes, Infantry
Col. Alexander Jobson, Infantry
Maj. Robert Kerr, Provost Company
Maj. William Selwyn King, Army Service Corps
Lt.-Col. Giffard Hamilton Macarthur King CMG Field Artillery
Maj. Robert Edward Jackson, Infantry
Lt.-Col. John Dudley Lavarack, Artillery
Maj. Frederick Washington Lawson, Engineers
Lt.-Col. Henry Dundas Keith Macartney, Field Artillery
Maj. Patrick John McCormack, Field Artillery
Maj. Roy Stanley McGregor, Army Medical Corps
Maj. Louis Evander McKenzie, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Q.M. and Hon. Major Charles Francis Minagall, Infantry
Lt.-Col. John Wesley Mitchell, Infantry
Maj. David Henry Moore, Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Arthur Henry Moseley, Army Medical Corps
Maj. Edric Noel Mulligan, Australian Engineers
Lt.-Col. Henry Simpson Newland, Army Medical Corps
Lt.-Col. Edward Creer Nome, Infantry
Maj. Edwin Andrew Olding, Field Artillery
Maj. John Joseph Power, Army Medical Corps
Lt.-Col. Edgar Maurice Ralph, General List
Lt.-Col. George Arthur Read, Infantry
Maj. John Dalyell Richardson, Light Horse Regiment
Maj. Harold William Riggall, Field Artillery
Maj. Septimus Godorphin Rowe, Field Artillery
Maj. Edward Irvine Charles Scott, Pioneer Battalion
Maj. Herbert James Shannon, Light Horse Regiment
Lt.-Col. Joseph Lexden Shellshear, Field Artv
Lt.-Col. James Charles Francis Slane, Infantry
Maj. Dudley Wallace Arabin Smith, Light Horse Regiment
Maj. William Smith, Provost Corps
Lt.-Col. William Stansfield, Army Service Corps
Lt.-Col. John Mitchell Young Stewart, Army Medical Corps
Maj. Harold Bourne Taylor, Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Alexander Hopkins Thwaites, Army Medical Service
Maj. Claude John Tozer, Army Medical Corps
Lt.-Col. Hugh Venables Vernon, Field Artillery
Tmp Lt.-Col. Charles Ernest Wassell, Army Medical Corps
Lt.-Col. Ernest Morgan Williams, Light Horse Regiment
Maj. Henry James Williams, Army Medical Corps
Maj. Eric Arundel Wilton, Machine Gun Corps
Lt.-Col. Percy William Woods MC Infantry
Lt.-Col. Arthur Raff Woolcock, Infantry
Maj. Malwyn Hayley  Beckett, Infantry
Lt.-Col. Murray William James Bourchier, Light Horse Regiment
Tmp Lt.-Col. Donald Cameron, Light Horse Regiment
Capt. George Vernon Davies, Army Medical Corps
Capt. Robert Derwent Dixon, Australian Infantry
Maj. Cuthbert Murchison Fetherstonhaugh, Light Horse Regiment
Maj. Reginald Norris Franklin, Light Horse Regiment
Lt.-Col. Robert Oswald Henderson, Infantry
Maj. Eric Montague Hyman, Light Horse Regiment
Maj. James Lawson, Light Horse Regiment
Maj. Leslie Herbert Payne, Infantry
Maj. Jeremiah Charles Selmes, Field Artillery
Maj. Roy Meldrum Thompson MC Field Artillery
Canadian Force
Capt. Samuel Buttrey Birds MC Infantry
Lt.-Col. Allison Hart Borden, Infantry
Maj. Alexander Grant, Infantry
Maj. John Alexander McEwan, Infantry
Lt.-Col. Andrew George Latta McNaughton, Field Artillery
Maj. Frederick Jackson Alderson, Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Carleton Woodford Allen, Pioneer Battalion
Maj. Alexander Alderson Anderson, Engineers
Maj. Thomas Victor Anderson, Engineers
Maj. Alfred Turner Bazin, Army Medical Corps
Maj. Percy George Bell, Army Medical Corps
Maj. Charles Corbishley Bennett, Infantry
Maj. Robert Bickerdike, Infantry
Maj. Alfred Sidney Buttenshaw, Ordnance Company
Lt.-Col. Glen Campbell, Pioneer Battalion
Lt.-Col. Robert Percy Clark MC Infantry
Lt.-Col. Frederick Fieldhouse Clarke, Railway Troops
Maj. George Alton Cline, Engineers
Maj. Frederick Thomas Coghlan, Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. James Kennedy Cornwall, Railway Troops
Maj. Ian Laurie Crawford, Infantry
Lt.-Col. James Edgar Davey, Army Medical Corps
Lt.-Col. Charles Harold Dickson, Army Medical Corps
Maj. Robert Loggie Masterson Donaldson, Ordnance Company
Lt.-Col. John Badenoch Donnelly, Forestry Company
Lt.-Col. William Henry Pferinger Elkins, Horse Artillery
Maj. Thomas Francis Elmitt, Infantry
Tmp Major Royal Lindsay Hamilton Ewing MC Infantry
Maj. James Johnston Fraser, Army Medical Corps
Maj. Thomas Gibson, Labour Battalion
Maj. Edward Crosby Goldie, Army Service Corps
Lt.-Col. Atholl Edwin Griffin, Railway Troops
Tmp Major The Hon. Francis Egerton Grosvenor MC Infantry
Lt.-Col. Edwin Gerald Hanson, Field Artillery
Maj. Edward Montgomery Harris, Army Service Corps
Lt.-Col. William Henry Harrison, Field Artillery
Maj. Harry Cecil Hatch, Infantry
Maj. Halfdan Fenton Harboe Hertzberg MC Engineers
Lt.-Col. Chilion Longley Hervey, Railway Troops
Lt.-Col. Charles Rapelje Hill, Infantry
Maj. Walter Court Hyde, Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. George Chalmers Johnston MC Mounted Rifles
Maj. George Knight Killam, Infantry
Maj. Charles Ernest King, Infantry
Tmp Lt.-Col. Thomas McCrae Leask, Army Medical Corps
Lt.-Col. William Bethune Lindsay CMG Engineers
Maj. Edison Franklin Lynn MC Engineers
Maj. William Broder McTaggart, Field Artillery
Maj. Donald John Macdonald MC Cavalry
Lt.-Col. James Brodie Lauder Macdonald, Railway Troops
Maj. Frederick Thomas McKean, Army Service Corps
Capt. William Gordon MacKendrick, Engineers
Maj. James Frederick McParland, Field Artillery
Lt. Charles Kirwan Craufurd Martin, Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Lawrence Thomas Martin, Railway Troops
Maj. Robert Frank Massie, Field Artillery
Lt. Arthur Clinton Maund, Infantry and Royal Flying Corps
Lt.-Col. Lionel Herbert Millen, Infantry
Lt. Frederick Frank Minchin MC Infantry, attd. Royal Flying Corps
Maj. Percival John Montague MC Infantry
Lt.-Col. Walter Hill Moodie, Railway Troops
Maj. John Aubrey Morphy, Pioneer Battalion
Maj. George Sidney Mothersill, Army Medical Corps
Lt.-Col. Thomas Joseph Francis Murphy, Army Medical Corps
Tmp Capt. Robert Henry Neeland, Labour Company
Maj. Daniel Jerome O'Donahoe, Infantry
Capt. Garnet Lehrle Ord, Pioneer Battalion
Maj. Richard Francis Parkinson, Infantry
Maj. Eric Pepler, Engineers
Lt.-Col. Charles Ayre Peters, Army Medical Corps
Capt. John Downey Pitman, Ordnance Company
Maj. Alan Torrence Powell, Infantry
Lt. Kenneth Alan Ramsay, Railway Troops
Maj. James Sabiston Rankin, Infantry
Maj. Clifford Hamilton Reason, Army Medical Corps
Maj. William Roy Reirdon, Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Blair Ripley, Railway Troops
Maj. Donald Edward Allan Rispin, Infantry
Maj. Robert Percy Rogers, Engineers
Lt.-Col. James Sclater, Infantry
Capt. Morris Alexander Scott, Machine Gun Corps
Lt.-Col. Samuel Simpson Sharpe, Infantry
Maj. John Ham Sills, Infantry
Maj. Henry Denne St. Alban Smith, Engineers
Capt. Richard Winslow Stayner MC Mounted Rifles
Maj. Henry Arthur Stewart, Army Service Corps
Maj. Cecil Valentine Stockwell, Field Artillery
Maj. Joseph Murray Syer, Field Artillery
Capt. David Sobey Tamblyn, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Maj. Harold Lyndridge Trotter, Engineers
Tmp Col. John Burton White, Forestry Corps
Hon. Lt.-Col. Rev. Albert William Woods, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Maj. Gordon Harold Aikins, Mounted Rifles
Lt. Walter Hartley Burgess, Infantry
Lt. John Angus Cameron, Infantry
Lt. William Francis Jamieson, Infantry
Lt. Hector Kennedy, Infantry
Maj. William Thewles Lawless, Infantry
Lt. Ronald Frederick Macnaghten, Infantry
Capt. Ronald Wilfred Pearson MC Infantry
Maj. Harold Murchinson Savage, Field Artillery
Capt. William Keating Walker MC Machine Gun Corps
Maj. William Douglas Wilson, Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Harvey Gordon Young, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Tmp Capt. Archibald Stirling Kennedy Anderson MC MB RAMC
Capt. Rupert Henry Anderson-Morshead, Devonshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. Duncan Gus Baillie, Yeomanry
Maj. Walter Agar Thomas Barstow MC Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Richard Maul Birkett, Royal Sussex Regiment, attd. Royal West Surrey Regiment
Tmp Capt. James Thornely Bowman MD RAMC
Capt. Henry Fergusson Brace, Hussars
Tmp Capt. John Edouard Marsdeu Bromley, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. John Jackson Cameron, South Staffordshire Regiment, attd. Royal Lancaster Regiment
Maj. James Francis Fraser-Tytler, Yeomanry, attd. Cameron Highlanders
Tmp Capt. Howard Boyd Graham MB RAMC
2nd Lt. Charles Ernest Henderson, London Regiment
Capt. and Bt. Major Henry Francis
Leonard Hilton-Green MC Gloucestershire Regiment, attd. A.C. Corps
Lt. Percy Frank Knightley, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Capt. Arthur McDougall, Yeomanry
Lt. Herbert Dryden Home Yorke Nepean, Indian Army
Maj. John Gordon Rees, Yeomanry, attd. Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Capt. Robert Thin Craig Robertson MB RAMC
Capt. Richard Adair Rochfort MC Royal Warwickshire Regiment, attd. Royal Berkshire Regiment
Capt. Alan Patrick Rodgerson, Indian Army
Maj. Leigh Pemberton Stedall, Yeomanry
Maj. Gerald Gane Thatcher, Royal Garrison Artillery, attd. Royal Field Artillery
Capt. and Bt. Major Gerald Lawrence Uniacke, Royal Lancaster Regiment
Newfoundland Force
Capt. Bertram Butler MC Newfoundland Regiment
New Zealand Force
Lt.-Col. Stephen Shepherd Allen, Infantry
Maj. Frederick Cameron MB New Zealand Medical Corps
Lt.-Col. Alexander Burnet Charters CMG Infantry
Maj. William Oliver Ennis, Pioneers Major David John Gibbs, Engineers
Maj. Halbert Cecil Glendining, Field Artillery
Maj. Edward James Hulbert, Mounted Rifles
Lt.-Col. James Neil McCarroll, Mounted Rifles
Maj. John McCare, Infantry
Lt.-Col. George Mitchell, Infantry
Maj. Donald Sinclair Murchison, Mounted Rifles
Maj. Clarence Nathaniel Newman, Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Charles Treweck Hand-Newton MD FRCS New Zealand Medical Corps
Maj. Edward Puttick, Rifle Brigade
Tmp Major Harry McKellar White Richardson MC Rifle Brigade
Maj. James Macdonald Richmond MC Field Artillery
Lt.-Col. Robert Amos Row, Infantry
Maj. James Stafford, New Zealand Veterinary Corps
Maj. Alan Duncan Stitt MC Infantry
Maj. Hugh Vickerman, Engineers
Lt.-Col. Claude Horace Weston, Infantry
South African Force
Tmp Major Charles Agnew Anderson, South African Water Supply Corps
Tmp Major Thomas William Armitage, South African Service Corps
Tmp Major George Edwin Brink, South African Force
Maj. Peter Skinner Clarke, South African Medical Corps
Tmp Lt.-Col. Thomas Harry Blew, Heavy Artillery
Lt.-Col. Ewan Christian, Infantry
Tmp Lt.-Col. Francis Richard Collins, Engineers
Maj. Fred Haselden, Infantry
Maj. Theophilus Edward Liefeldt, Native Labour Corps
Maj. John James Mulvey, Pioneer Battalion
Tmp Capt. Hugh Brindley Owen MB Uganda Medical Service
Brig.-Gen.-General William Ernest Collins Tanner CMG Infantry
Maj. David Morris Tomory, South African Medical Corps
Capt. Charles Frederick Bernard Viney, Mounted Rifles
Lt.-Col. Arthur Blackwood Ward MB South African Medical Corps
Tmp Lt.-Col. Gilbert Neville Williams, South African Forces
Awarded a Bar to the Distinguished Service Order (DSO*)[edit]
Commander William Marshall DSO RD Royal Naval Reserve
Maj. William Nathaniel Stuart Alexander DSO Connaught Rangers
Capt. and Bt. Major Michael George Henry Barker DSO Lincolnshire Regiment
Maj. Thomas Andrew Dunlop Best DSO Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Capt. and Bt. Major John Dopping Boyd DSO Royal West Surrey Regiment
Lt. Charles Henry Dowden DSO MC King's Royal Rifle Corps
Maj. Archibald Jenner Ellis DSO Border Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Henry Gaspard de Lavalette Ferguson DSO attd. Norfolk Regiment
Maj. Marmion Carr Ferrers-Guy DSO Lancashire Fusiliers
Maj. Ronald Foster Forbes DSO Highland Light Infantry
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Sidney Goodall Francis DSO West Yorkshire Regiment
Lt.-Col. John Malise Anne Graham DSO Royal Lancaster Regiment
Maj. William Green DSO Royal Highlanders
Tmp Capt. James Robertson Campbell Greenlees DSO MB RAMC
Capt. Cecil Champagne Herbert-Stepney DSO King's Royal Rifle Corps
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Charles Graeme Higgins DSO Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Maj. Clifford Hill DSO East African Mounted Rifles
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Sir Thomas Dare Jackson Bt MVO DSO Royal Lancaster Regiment
Capt. and Bt. Major Alexander Colin Johnston DSO MC Worcestershire Regiment
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Alexander Fraser Campbell Maclachlan DSO King's Royal Rifle Corps
Maj. Samuel McDonald DSO Gordon Highlanders
Maj. Reginald George Maturin DSO Royal Field Artillery
Maj. Arthur Maxwell DSO London Regiment
Maj. Herbert Milward Milward DSO Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Maj. Noel Ernest Money DSO Shropshire Yeomanry
Maj. Hubert Horatio Shirley Morant DSO Durham Light Infantry
Lt.-Col. Ronald Ernest Murray DSO British South Africa Police
Tmp Major Sholto Stuart Ogilvie DSO Wiltshire Regiment
Maj. George Parsons DSO British South Africa Police
Tmp Lt.-Col. Warren John Peacocke DSO Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Maj. William Moore Bell Sparkes DSO RAMC
Capt. and Bt. Major Gerald Lawrence Uniacke DSO Royal Lancaster Regiment, and 2nd Nigeria Regiment
Capt. Lancelot Edward Seth Ward DSO late Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Maj. and Bt. Lt.-Col. Donald Munro Watt DSO Gurkha Rifles, Indian Army
Capt. and Bt. Major Bertram Charles Maximilian Western DSO East Lancashire Regiment
Maj. Stuart Lumley Whatford DSO Yorkshire Regiment
Maj. Thomas Edmund Palmer Wickham DSO Royal Artillery
Capt. Frank Worthington DSO MB RAMC
Maj. Kenneth Duncan DSO Royal Field Artillery
Maj. George Scott Jackson DSO Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp Surgeon William James McCracken DSO MC MB RN
Maj. Horace Somerville Sewell DSO Dragoon Guards
Maj. Baptist Johnson Barton DSO Yorkshire Light Infantry
Lt.-Col. Guy Archibald Hastings Beatty DSO Indian Cavalry
Maj. Alfred Morey Boyall DSO West Yorkshire Regiment
Maj. Hugh Annesley Gray-Cheape DSO Yeomanry
Maj. John Hardress-Lloyd DSO Tank Corps
Capt. Charles Hervey Hoare DSO Yeomanry
Capt. Edward Darby Jackson DSO King's Own Scottish Borderers
Tmp Major Charles Kennett James DSO Border Regiment
Maj. George Knowles DSO Indian Cavalry
Arthur Campden Little DSO Hussars
Maj. Arthur Mordaunt Mills DSO Indian Cavalry
Maj. Arthur Carr Osburn DSO RAMC
Lt. James Frederick Plunkett DSO MC DCM Royal Irish Regiment
Capt. Geoffrey Taunton Raikes DSO South Wales Borderers
Australian Imperial Force
Lt.-Col. William Grant DSO Australian Light Horse
Lt.-Col. Thomas John Todd DSO Light Horse Regiment
Lt.-Col. Reginald John Albert Travers DSO Infantry
Canadian Force
Lt.-Col. Denis Colburn Draper DSO Mounted Rifles Battalion
Lt.-Col. John Mervyn Prower DSO Infantry
Lt.-Col. John Munro Ross DSO Infantry
Maj. Lawrence Vincent Moore Cosgrave DSO Canadian Artillery
Lt.-Col. William Wasbrough Foster DSO Canadian Infantry
Maj. George Waters MacLeod DSO Canadian Infantry
Maj. Hugh Wilderspin Niven DSO MC Canadian Infantry
New Zealand Force
Lt.-Col. George Augustus King DSO Canterbury Regiment
Lt.-Col. Hugh Stewart DSO Canterbury Regiment
Lt. Col. James Henry Whyte DSO Wellington Mounted Rifles
Awarded a Second Bar to the Distinguished Service Order (DSO**)[edit]
Tmp Lt.-Commander Arthur Holland Asquith DSO* Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Military Cross (MC)[edit]
Tmp 2nd Lt. Edgar Victor William Ablett, Army Cyclist Corps
Tmp Lt. Walter Murray Ablewhite, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Tmp Lt. Eric Pearson Adair, Royal Engineers
Lt. George Alexander Findlay Adam, Yeomanry
Capt. Robert Adam, Gordon Highlanders
Tmp Capt. Reginald Addenbrooke-Prout, General List, and Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Harry Adshead, Worcestershire Regiment
Lt. Philip Henry Adshead, Gordon Highlanders
C.S. Maj. George Alexander Aiers, Grenadier Guards
2nd Lt. Ralph Bower Ainsworth, Durham Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Flockart Aitken, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Jack Phillips Akerman, Somerset Light Infantry
2nd Lt. Denis William Aldridge, Royal Engineers
Capt. Charles Adam Murray Alexander Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Lt. Charles William Allen, Royal Artillery
Capt. Clarence George Allen, Army Service Corps
2nd Lt. Daniel Frank Allen, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Edward Allen, Royal Garrison Artillery
Battery Sergeant Major Edward Allen, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Ernest Mortimer Allen, Hampshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. George William Graham Allen, Tank Corps
Lt. Charles Walter Allfrey, Royal Horse Artillery
C.S. Maj. Frank Allsopp, North Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Herbert Alnwick, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Ernest Haik Riddall Altounyan MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. John Goldwell Ambrose, Royal Engineers
Capt. William Gerald Ambrose Cheshire Regiment, and Nigeria Regiment
Capt. Francis Sainthill Anderson, Royal Horse Artillery
Lt. George Frederick Anderson, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. James Elphinstone Bocquet Anderson, Liverpool Regiment
Capt. John George Anderson, RAMC
Capt. Aubrey Claude Anderton, Royal Engineers
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. James Edward Hill Anderton, RAMC
Capt. James Collingwood Andrews, London Regiment
Capt. Herbert William Andrews, Leinster Regiment
Tmp Lt. Robert Stuart Andrews, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Capt. Arthur Stanley Angwin, Royal Engineers
Capt. John Archibald Angus, York & Lancaster Regiment
Capt. George Henry Anon, Yeomanry
Capt. Philip Humphrey Antrobus, Irish Guards
Capt. Robert Weniyss Muir Arbuthnot, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. David Archibald, Royal Highlanders
Tmp Capt. Robert Richmond Archibald MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. John Thompson Argent, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Charles William Arnett, Army Ordnance Depot
2nd Lt. Charles Francis Arrowsmith, Liverpool Regiment
Capt. Harold Garten Ash, London Regiment
Tmp Lt. William James Asher, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Capt. Peter Ashton, Herefordshire Regiment
2nd Lt. George Ashwell, Tank Corps
2nd Lt. Kenneth Ingham Aspinall, Norfolk Regiment
2nd Lt. Vivien Lindsey Aspland, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Archibald Matthew Neal Aston, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Fred Atkinson, Liverpool Regiment
2nd Lt. John Corbett Atkinson, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Albert Henry Austin, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Capt. Thomas Aveling, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Edmund Portman Awdry, Yeomanry
2nd Lt. Percy Ronald Ayers, Welsh Regiment
2nd Lt. Evelyn Frederick Bacon, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Lionel Ashley Baddeley, Army Service Corps
2nd Lt. George Norman Bagley, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Charles Edward Kerwia Bagot, Connaught Rangers
Capt. William Browne Bagshaw, Manchester Regiment
C.S. Maj. Arthur Bailey, Gloucestershire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Charles Bailey, Royal Dublin Fusiliers
2nd Lt. John Wallis Bailey, Royal Engineers
Lt. Andrew Ramsay Bain, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Tmp Lt. Lewis Bam, Royal West Surrey Regiment
Tmp Capt. Anthony Hugh Bambridge, North Staffordshire Regiment
Lt. Arthur Septimus Baines, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. George Philip Baines, Durham Light Infantry
Capt. John Hardcastle Baines, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Cecil Avery Baker, South Wales Borderers
Tmp Capt. Geoffrey Lewis Vashon Baker, Army Service Corps
Tmp Lt. Charles Percy Lionel Balcombe, Royal Engineers
Capt. Edward William Sturgis Balfour DSO Dragoon Guards
2nd Lt. Arthur Hugh Ball, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. George Henry Ball, Royal Garrison Artillery, Spec. Reserve
Q.M. and Temp Honorary Lt. John Thomas Ball, Manchester Regiment
Rev. Robert Wilfred Balleine, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. Hugh Gordon Bambridge, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Harold Bancroft, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Edgar Lance Banfield, Royal Irish Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. John Wilson Bansall, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Francis James Neville Barber, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Sub-Lt. Leonard William Barber, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, attd. Machine Gun Company
Capt. John Hamilton Barbor, Army Service Corps
2nd Lt. William John Barclay, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. William Keith Barclay, Royal Lancaster Regiment
Tmp Lt. Edward Arthur Baring-Gould, Intelligence Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Arthur Herbert Barltrop, West Yorkshire Regiment
Lt. Henry Kentish Barnes Royal Horse Artillery
Tmp Lt. Percy Barnfather, Middlesex Regiment
Capt. Donald Gordon Barnsley, Gloucestershire Regiment
Lt. John Barnwell, Leinster Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Lt. John Ashworth Barraclough, Royal Lancaster Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. James Barratt, Manchester Regiment
Tmp Lt. Ernest Gibbons Barrell, attd. Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry and Machine Gun Corps
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Walter Richard Michael Barrett, Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry
Capt. Albert Henry Darley Barren, Infantry
Act. Lt. Harold Eustace Barrow, Liverpool Regiment
Lt. John Nelson Barstow, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Bertram Friend Bartlett, RAMC
Tmp 2nd Lt. Clarence Townley Barton, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Martin Batchelor, King's African Rifles
Lt. Alfred Bates, East Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Fred Luntley Battershill, Royal Irish Rifles
Lt. Ernest Edward Battle, York & Lancaster Regiment
Tmp Lt. Percy Bayley, Army Service Corps
2nd Lt. Percy Bayliss, Royal Scots
Tmp 2nd Lt. Arthur Gerald Baynham, Tank Corps
Tmp Capt. Eric Beadon, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. Alan Beal, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. John Richmer Beall, South Lancashire Regiment
Lt. Charles William Beart, Durham Light Infantry
Capt. Charles Elles Stuart Beatson, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Robert Harvey Beaufoy, London Regiment
Lt. Gerald Beaumont, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Tmp Lt. John Somerville Beaumont, General List
Tmp Lt. Maurice James Beavis, Royal Artillery
Capt. James Geoffrey Brydon Beazley, Liverpool Regiment
Lt. Edward Overington Becher, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Thomas Beck, Highland Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Geoffrey Reid Arnett Beckett, Gloucestershire Regiment
Lt. Clive Walter Beckingham, Royal Field Artillery
C.S. Maj. Robert Frederick Beckley, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Lt. James Robert Bedwell, Royal Garrison Artillery and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Reginald Francis Beech, Northamptonshire Regiment and Gold Coast Regiment
Capt. Ronald Philipps Glynn Begbie, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Anthony Harley Mark Bell, Hussars
Lt. Douglas Ward Bell, Worcestershire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Henry James Bell, Yeomanry
2nd Lt. Leonard Charles Bell, Royal Highlanders
Tmp 2nd Lt. Brian Maude Bellasis, Gloucestershire Regiment
Lt. Gilbert Charles Beloe, Gloucestershire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Edward Benoe-Trower, South Wales Borderers
Tmp Lt. Ernest Wallace Benson, Bedfordshire Regiment
Lt. Francis Riou Benson, Yeomanry
Tmp 2nd Lt. Norman de Mattes Bentwich, Special List
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Bennett, Royal Flying Corps
Capt. George de la Poer Beresford, Cavalry, Indian Army
Rev. Harry Percy Berkeley, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Capt. Esm Beranger Beauchamp Berrange, Royal West Surrey Regiment
Lt. Jesse Dell Berndge, Royal Engineers
Tmp Sub-Lt. John Hulme Bessell, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Rev. John Kenneth Best, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Lt. Diavid Jardine Bethell, Scots Guards
Battery Sergeant Major Edward Harold Bette, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. John Valentine Betts, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Alexander Braithwaite Bevan Bevan, Royal Engineers
Capt. Henry Vincent Bevington, London Regiment
Capt. Benjamin John Bewley, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Theophilus Beynon, General List
B.Q.M. Sgt. Henry Bibby, Lancashire Fusiliers
Rev. Kenneth Julian Faithfull Bickersteth, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. Arthur Bicknell, Gloucestershire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Charles Leslie Pinckard Biggar, Hampshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Edward Hugh Bandloss, Headquarters, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Percy Carr Bird, Gordon Highlanders, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Capt. Oswald Hornby Joseph Birley, Intelligence Corps
Tmp Lt. Granville Baylis Powell Birtles, Royal Engineers
Capt. Thomas Edward Bisdee, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry
Tmp 2nd Lt. Alfred Harold Bishop, Royal Engineers
Lt. Frank Cyril Bishop, London Regiment
2nd Lt. Eric Bisset, Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Leonard Frederick Bittles, Essex Regiment
Lt. John Robert Black, Seaforth Highlanders
Capt. Norman Valentine Blacker, East Yorkshire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Sub-Lt. Leonard Anderson Blackball, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Capt. Hans Frederick Blackwood, Yorkshire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Charles Edwin Norman Blake, Royal Field Artillery
Hon. Lt. William Atherstone Blake, Intelligence Department
Tmp Capt. John Edward Blakemore, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. George Frederick Blakesley, Special List
Capt. Owen Geoffrey Blayney, Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Maurice Frederick Bliss, RAMC
R.S. Maj. Josiah Bloomfield, Royal Sussex Regiment
Tmp Lt. Roland Charles Biolmbroke, Suffolk Regiment
Tmp Capt. Richard Bolton, West Riding Regiment
Lt. James Ferguson Bomford, Worcestershire Regiment
Rev. Basil Kendall Bond, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. Thomas Booth, Connaught Rangers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Edward Fullerton Borrie, Royal Engineers
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Francis Sydney Boshell, Royal Berkshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Philip Rutherford Boswell, RAMC
2nd Lt. George Gerald Randall Bott, South Lancashire Regiment
Rev. Aloysius M. Bouchier, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Lt. Donald Boumphrey, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. James Bourke, Leinster Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Capt. Robert Leonard Sowen, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Tmp Lt. Francis William Bowman, Nyasaland Field Force
Lt. Gerald Wilberforce Bowman, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. William Everett Bowmass, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Alfred Boacall, Royal Engineers
Lt. Percy Boxall, Army Service Corps
Capt. John Francis Croft Boyes, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Ernest Franklin Bozman, Royal West Kent Regiment
Lt. Philip Holmes Bradbury, Welsh Regiment
Lt. Albert Bradley, Cheshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. William James Bradley, Gloucestershire Regiment
Lt. William Lawrence Bragg, Royal Horse Artillery
Lt. George Btraime, North Staffordshire Regiment
R.S. Maj. William George Brain, Gloucestershire Regiment
Capt. Champion Andrew Branfill, Yeomanry
Lt. William Russell Brazier, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Charles Gordon Brentnall MB RAMC
Tmp 2nd Lt. Douglas Lancelot Brereton, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Reginald de Renzie Brett, General List and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Oswald George Breul, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Cecil Baron Briggs, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Herbert George William Brinsley, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Harry Brissenden, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. John Jeffries Britten, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Arthur Frederick Britton, General List and Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Arthur Vernon Broadbent, West Riding Regiment
Capt. Edgar Richard Broadbent, Hussars
Capt. Edric William Broadberry, Essex Regiment, and Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Arthur Gordon Brock, East Kent Regiment
C.S. Maj. Edward Clarence Brock Essex Regiment
2nd Lt. Cyril Elcomb Brockhurst, Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. Patrick Tait Brodie, General List, King's African Rifles
Lt. Godfrey Leveson Brooke-Hunt, Indian Army Reserve of Officers
2nd Lt. William James Brooks, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Andrew Terras Brown, West Yorkshire Regiment
Lt. Francis War burton Brown, Seaforth Highlanders
Lt. Frank Cooper William Brown, Leinster Regiment
Lt. John Brown, Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Niman Stewart Brown, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Orlando Moray Brown, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Robert Harold Brown, North Staffordshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Stewart Charles Brown, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Walter James Brown, South Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Capt. William Ernest Enron, South Wales Borderers
Tmp Lt. William Neilson Brown, Gordon Highlanders
Tmp Capt. William Rae Brown, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Cyril Edward Browne, Army Service Corps
Tmp Lt. Harold Edward Browne, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Percival Hugh Browne, Army Cyclist Corps
Lt. Walter Robinson Brownell, Liverpool Regiment
2nd Lt. Frank Edwin Browning, Gloucestershire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Selwyn Browning, West Riding Regiment
Lt. Nevil Charles Dowell Brownjohn, Royal Engineers
Lt. Alexander Livingstone Bruce, Reserve of Officers
Lt. George Burnley Bruce, West Riding Regiment
Lt. Dominick Nicholas Brunioardi, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Arthur Gilbert Bryant, Army Service Corps
2nd Lt. Frederick George Bryant, Royal Engineers
Lt. Herbert Disbrow Brydone-Jack, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. George Brymer, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Thomas Ogilvy Malcolm Buchan, Royal West Surrey Regiment
Tmp Lt. Walter Buchanan-Smith, Nigeria Regiment
Tmp Capt. Sydney Thacker Buck, Royal Sussex Regiment
Capt. Charles Dudley Maybury Buckley, RAMC
Tmp Capt. James Christopher Bull, West Riding Regiment
Tmp Lt. Stanley Crossland Bullock, Royal Engineers
Capt. Sidney Waterfield Bunker, Royal Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Arthur Hanley Bunning, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Thomas George Deane Burdett, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Q.M. and Temp Honorary Lt. Robert Douglas Burgess, Royal Fusiliers
Rev. William Gaisford Burgis, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp 2nd Lt. Harold French Burke, Royal Artillery
Rev. Henry Beaumont F. Burnaby, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Lt. Hugh Hanton Burness, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. James Burnie, Liverpool Regiment
Rev. Robert Francis Burrow, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp 2nd Lt. Alfred Edward Burrowes, Royal Dublin Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Charles Selss Burrows, Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Ralph Withers Burton, East Surrey Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Thomas Henry Burton, Royal Marine Light Infantry
2nd Lt. William Edgar Bush, Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Leslie Raymond Butlin, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Capt. Alick Byass, Army Service Corps
Tmp Lt. John Osmer Byrne, Northumberland Fusiliers
Lt. Frederick Jonathan Bywater, Royal Engineers
Lt. Felix Clement Vincent Digby Caillard, Somerset Light Infantry
Lt. Francis Herbert Cairnes, Royal Field Artillery
C.S. Maj. Richard Martin Callendor, London Regiment
2nd Lt. William Cam, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Alan Charles Cameron, Devonshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. John Jackson Cameron, South Staffordshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Angus Campbell, RAMC
Lt. George Campbell, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. George Maclean Campbell MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. Herbert Campbell, General List
Tmp 2nd Lt. Hugh Campbell, Royal Engineers
Capt. Norman Robertson Campbell, Highland Light Infantry
Tmp 2nd Lt. George Murray-Campigh, General List
Tmp 2nd Lt. Cyril Victor Canning, Suffolk Regiment
Capt. Neil Canthe MB RAMC
Lt. Arthur Aloysius Carberry, Manchester Regiment
Tmp Capt. Robert Holegate Cardwell, Royal Engineers
Capt. Arthur George Cardy, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
2nd Lt. Eric Carhart, North Staffordshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Alfred Edward Carr, Tank Corps
Lt. Arthur Ralph Carr, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt. Arthur Leonard Carroll, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Arthur Borwood Carter, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. John Lovelace Carter, Army Service Corps
2nd Lt. Stanley Cyril Cartel, Royal Engineers
Lt. William Carter, Royal Lancaster Regiment
Capt. Francis Xavier Shakeshaft Carus, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Reginald John Cash, North Lancashire Regiment
Capt. Richard Bewley Caton, Norfolk Regiment
Tmp Capt. Leonard Arthur Cattley, East Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. George Caulfield, Highland Light Infantry
Capt. Frederick George Cavendish, Leinster Regiment
Tmp Capt. Ronald de Bode Cazalet, Intelligence Corps
Tmp Lt. Percy John Cazes, General List, attd. Nyasaland Field Force
Lt. Frank Chadwick, King's Royal Rifle Corps
2nd Lt. William Chalmers, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, attd. Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Reginald Percy Chamberlain, Royal Engineers
Lt. Theodore Gervaise Sandeman Chamber, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Eric Adrian Charles Deschamps Chamier, Lincolnshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Alfred Leonard Chandler, Army Service Corps
Lt. Cyril John Chandler, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Gay Dunston Channon, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Arthur Randolph Chapman, General List
Tmp 2nd Lt. Arthur Sutherland Chapman, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Lt. Godfrey Markhaon Charton, Intelligence Department
Lt. Arthur James Child, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Corrie Denew Chase, Royal Irish Rifles
Capt. Francis Clervaux Chaytor, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Charles Christie, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. Charles William Christie, Scottish Rifles
Capt. Geoffrey Christie-Miller, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Lt. Arthur Church, Intelligence Department
Tmp Lt. Basil Hampden Church, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Valentine William Bland Church, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Ernest Swann Chuter, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Thomas Clapperton, East Kent Regiment
Lt. Algernon Basil Clark, Royal Highlanders
Capt. Edmund Graham Clark, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. Frederick William Clark, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Firstbrook Clarke, North Staffordshire Regiment
Battery Sergeant Major James Clarke, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Paul Humphrey Clarke, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. William Arthur Clarke, London Regiment
Rev. Philip Thomas Byard Clayton, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Capt. Carleton Main Clement, General List and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Capt. Raymond George Heibert Clements, Royal Engineers
Rev. Thomas Hartley Cleworth, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Lt. Robert Clews, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Bertram Clifford, Army Ordnance Depot
Tmp Lt. Edmund Henry Clokey, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Arthur Butler Clough, Royal Engineers
Lt. Eric Hamifton Coad, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. William North Coates, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. James Stuart Coats, Coldstream Guards
Tmp Capt. PeterCochran, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. James Aikman Cochrane, Royal Scots Fusiliers, and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Capt. Frederick Pepys Cockerell, Special List
Tmp 2nd Lt. Frank Heibert Colebrook, Royal Engineers
Lt. Herbert Cecil Coleman, Royal Sussex Regiment
Lt. Lewis Coleman, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Ernest Alfred Coles, London Regiment
Capt. James Collioun, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Lt. Cecil Bernard Romer Collenette, London Regiment
Lt. Angus Lyell Collier, Cameron Highlanders
Lt. Samuel Collier, Cheshire Regiment, and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Capt. William Ttegonwell Collier, RAMC
Rev. Ignatius Collins, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Capt. John Gordon Collins, Worcestershire Regiment, and Nigeria Regiment
Hon. Lt. Edward Oliver Collison, Army Ordnance Depot
Lt. Francas John Colston, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Christopher Comely, Monmouthshire Regiment
2nd Lt. George William Coney, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. William MaitLand Congreve, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Clifford Edward Constable, King Edward's Horse
Rev. Daniel Conway, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Capt. Frederick Charles Cook, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. BrianKennedy Cooke, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Rav Henry Robert Cooke, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Capt. John Campbell Cooke, General List
Tmp Lt. John Harbourne Cooke, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Ronald Campbell Cooke, RAMC
Lt. Henry Guy Cooper, Indian Army Reserve of Officers
Tmp Lt. Ralph Cooper, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Robert William Cooper, General List
Capt. Walter Cooper, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. John Coote, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Capt. Charles Cope, Liverpool Regiment
Lt. George Arnold Cope, attd. Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Hugh Tithe Copinger-Hill, Suffolk Regiment
Lt. Leonard Cordingley, West Riding Regiment
Lt. William Myles Fenton Corry, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Alexander Kirkpatrick Cosgrave MB RAMC
Capt. Thomas Joseph Costello MB RAMC
Rev. James Aloysius Cotter, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
C.S. Maj. Sidney Herbert Court, Coldstream Guards
Tmp Lt. Stephen Lewis Courtaud, Worcestershire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Rev. Flix Couturier, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
2nd Lt. John Cowan, Royal Scots
Lt. Walham Alexander Cowan, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. John Ignatius William Cowgill, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Lt. Charles John Cowley, Welsh Regiment
Capt. Victor Leopold Spencer Cowley, Royal Irish Rifles, attd. Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. William Eric Cowlishaw, North Staffordshire Regiment
Capt. Arthur Leslie Cowtan, London Regiment
Lt. Alfred Hope Gordon Cox, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Capt. Lionel Howard Cox, Gloucestershire Regiment and Machine Gun Corps
Lt. William Hofmeyr Craib, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Robert Ritchie Craig, Border Regiment
Capt. Thomas Edgar Craik, Yorkshire Light Infantry, attd. Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Herbert Cranage, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Charles Tennyson Cranswick, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Sidney Cranswick, Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. Alan Edzle Crawford, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. John Risdon Murdoch Crawford, Royal Engineers
Lt. Richard William Bunney Crawford-Clarke, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Stanley William Francis Crofts, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. James Adrian Crombie, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Harold Powell Crosland, Yeomanry
Tmp Capt. Alfred Frank Cross, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Arthur Max Cross, Suffolk Regiment
Lt. Maurice Edmund Crossland, London Regiment
Lt. Francis Harrie Crouch, Lancashire Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Percy Crouch, Leicestershire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Thomas Alexander Crozier, Royal West Surrey Regiment
Tmp Capt. Hugh Ellis Davies Cullen, South Staffordshire Regiment
Capt. James Crossley Cunningham, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Lt. Thomas John Cunnison, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Elliott Bailhe Currie, Royal Engineers
Lt. John Ralph Willoughby Curtois, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Robert Frederick Cuthbert, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Tmp 2nd Lt. Francis George Cutts, Royal Engineers
Capt. Terence Joseph Daintith, Indian Postal Service
2nd Lt. Frederick Dale, King's Own Scottish Borderers
Lt. Charles Dalton, Royal Fusiliers
Lt. James Naughton Dandie, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt. Reginald George Dianks, Royal West Surrey Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Henry Herbert Darby, Rifle Brigade
Lt. Alexander Spears Darrooh, Liverpool Regiment
2nd Lt. James Daxroch, Liverpool Regiment
Capt. Richard Charles Gordon Dartfard, London Regiment
Lt. Charles Galbon Darwin, Unattd. List
2nd Lt. Arthur Allan Orme Davenport, East Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Arthur Henry Davenport, Royal Engineers
Lt. Geoirge Brooking Davey, Liverpool Regiment
Tmp Capt. John Poison Davidson MB RAMC
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Davie, Royal Scots
Capt. Thomas McNaughbon Davie, RAMC
Tmp Capt. Arthur Rowland Davies, Royal Engineers
Capt. Henry Davies, Royal Engineers
Capt. Henry David Kingsley Davies, Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. James Henry Davies, General List
C.S. Maj. Tom Davies, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Lt. Alexander Horace-Davis, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Howard John Vaisey Davis, Army Service Corps
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. James Davis, RAMC
Tmp Capt. James Frederick Davison, General List and Royal Flying Corps
R.S. Maj. John James Dawkins, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Lt. Samuel Dawson, Royal Artillery
Rev. Henry Cyril Day, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. Julian Day, Yeomanry
Capt. Richard Day, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Ernest Betton Deakin, Essex Regiment
Tmp Lt. Albert Gardner Dean, South Lancashire Regiment
Sgt. Major David Edward Dean, RAMC
Tmp 2nd Lt. Harold Dean, Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Colin Hermann Deane, Army Ordnance Depot
Tmp Capt. Henry Speldewinde de Boer, RAMC
Tmp Capt. George Dekin, Royal Fusiliers
Lt. Victor Shore de Fleurriet Delaforce, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Frank Delves, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Rev. Henry Demaison, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Capt. Jacob Demeza, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. George Barlow Dempsey, Manchester Regiment
Tmp Capt. James Arthur Dermot Dempsey, Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Lt. Percival Barr Denison, Army Ordnance Depot
Tmp Capt. Raymond Hugh Denman, Royal Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Henry Denne, Wiltshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Frederick Stephenson Dent, Army Cyclist Corps
Capt. John Finlay Dew, Scottish Rifles, Spec. Reserve
Lt. Gerald Knocker Dibb, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Frederick Charles Dice, Dorsetshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Robert Dickie, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Lt. Norman Ernest Valentine Dicks, Royal Irish Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Arthur Larimer Dickson, Army Ordnance Depot
Capt. Ian Dunbar Dickson MD Royal Army Medical Corps (RAMC)
Lt. Richard Wale Gordon Dill, Life Guards
Capt. William Alfred Dimoline, East Surrey Regiment
Capt. Sydney Cecil William Disney, Lincolnshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Henry Philip Dix, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Tmp Capt. Oswald Dixon, East African Vet Corps
2nd Lt. William Leonard Price Dobbin, Royal Irish Rifles
C.S. Maj. Walter Harry Dobson, Machine Gun Guards
Tmp Capt. John Freeman Dodd, Durham Light Infantry
Rev. Rowland Pocock Dodd, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. Peter Doig, Royal Engineers
Lt. William Donald MB RAMC
Tmp Sub-Lt. Richard Donaldson, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Tmp Capt. Francis Donnelly, Royal Engineers
Capt. Gordon Huxley Donnelly, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Cyril Bernard Donovan, Royal Dublin Fusiliers
Lt. Thomas Donovan, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Edward Doolan, Army Service Corps
Tmp Lt. George Vibert Douglas, Royal Engineers, Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Percy Gordon Douglas, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. William George Dove, Royal West Kent Regiment
Lt. John William Downes, Yeomanry
Capt. Walter Douglas Downes, Royal Sussex Regiment and Nigeria Regiment
Tmp Capt. Frederick Joseph Downey, Northumberland Fusiliers
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Sidney Downing, Devonshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Aubrey Osier Dowson, Rifle Brigade
Tmp Lt. Henry Dinham Drew, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Lt. Percy Frederick Drew, Royal Sussex Regiment
2nd Lt. Arthur Driver, West Riding Regiment
Tmp Capt. Godfrey Rolles Driver, Graves Regn. Unit
Lt. John Christopher Druce, East Surrey Regiment
Capt. John Ebenezer Drysdale, Army Service Corps
Capt. Thomas Gerard du Buisson, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. George Vernon Dudley, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Charles Gordon Duff, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Granville John Burnley Duff, Norfolk Regiment
Lt. Walter Geoffrey Dugdale, Yeomanry
Tmp Lt. Henry Hare Dugmore, King's African Rifles
Tmp Capt. Reginald George Fitzroy Dumaresq, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Carlyle MacGregor Dunbar, late Hussars
C.S. Maj. David Duncan, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Capt. Hugn Stewart Duncan, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Lancelot Duncan, Gordon Highlanders
Tmp Lt. Charles Henry Dunkley, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Thomas William Edgar Dunkley, Dorsetshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Patrick Dunne, Royal Engineers
Lt. Frederick Eustace Dunsmuir, Highland Light Infantry
Tmp Lt. James Gordon Durham, General List
2nd Lt. Donald James Duthie, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Andrew Marshall Duxbury, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Harry Dymore, Royal Scots
2nd Lt. Eric Eadie, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Arthur Charles Henry Eagles, Army Ordnance Depot
Lt. Henry Parslow Eames, Royal Engineers
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Leonard Eastmead, Rifle Brigade
Tmp Lt. Harold Edmund Eastwood, Army Ordnance Depot
Lt. John Patrick Echlin, Royal Engineers
Tmp Sub-Lt. Charles James Eddolls, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Lt. Ivan John Edell, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. John Green Edgar, Officers Training Corps, empld. Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry
Lt. Arthur Wayman Edwards, York & Lancaster Regiment
Capt. Bartle Mordaunt Marsham Edwards, Rifle Brigade
2nd Lt. John Wesley Edwards, Yeomanry
B.Q.M. Sgt. Robert Henry Edwards, Lancashire Fusiliers
Lt. Richard Huyshe Eliot, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. Joseph Haslett Elliott MD RAMC
Rev. Ernest Sayer Ellis, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Capt. Norman Thomas Ellis, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Arthur David Ellison, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. James Frederick Ellison, Royal Marine Light Infantry
Staff Sergeant Major Alexander Ellwood, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. Herbert Emerson MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. Charles Arthur Emery, Liverpool Regiment
Lt. James Esmonde, Royal Dublin Fusiliers
C.S. Maj. Charles Martin Estall, East Surrey Regiment
Capt. Emerys Hunter Evans, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. William Henry Evans, General List, Nyasaland Field Force
Tmp Capt. William Herbert Evans, Northamptonshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. William Martin Evans, Royal Engineers
Lt. Arthur Charles Tarver Evanson, East Surrey Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Lt. Peicy Briant Everett, York & Lancaster Regiment
Capt. John Fullerton Evetts, Scottish Rifles
Tmp Capt. William Alfred Evetts, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Chetwode Percy Evill, Indian Army Reserve of Officers
Tmp Capt. Brian Walter Fagan, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Gerald Watson Failes, Norfolk Regiment
Capt. Leslie John Fairchild, Wiltshire Regiment
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Robert Fairley, London Regiment
Lt. Greame Ogilvie Fairlie, Machine Gun Corps
Rev. George Moncur Fairweather, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. Charles Gower Fannin, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Cecil Graham Farquharson, Royal Marine Light Infantry
Lt. Francis Archibald Farquharson, Indian Army Reserve of Officers
2nd Lt. Robert Berresf ord Fawcett, Royal Scots Fusiliers
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Halifax Feggetter, Northumberland Fusiliers
Capt. Robert Humphrey Feilden, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. John George Fielder, Royal Garrison Artillery
Rev. John Green Fenn, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Capt. Alexander Ferguson Royal Irish Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. John Caldwell Fergusson, RAMC
C.S. Maj. Frank Field, Royal Lancaster Regiment
2nd Lt. Percy Filkins, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Richard Finch, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Frederick Wilham Findlay, Gordon Highlanders
Tmp Lt. Hugh Carswell Findlay, King's African Rifles
Lt. John Francis Finn, Essex Regiment
Capt. Arthur Claude Finnimore, Royal Engineers
Rev. Joseph Firth, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Lt. Sydney Howard Fish, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Tmp 2nd Lt. Henry Cecil-Fisher, Middlesex Regiment
Tmp Lt. Edwin William Conquest Flavell, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Capt. Charles Ernest Fleischl, Army Service Corps
Capt. Basil Lindley Fletcher, Manchester Regiment
Tmp Capt. The Hon. Hugh Lawrence Fletcher Moulton, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt. Hugh Flint, Hampshire Regiment
Capt. Basil Edward Floyd, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Richard Cunningham Foot, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Henry Norman Forbes, Lancers
Tmp Capt. Edward Maurice Ford, Army Service Corps
Tmp Lt. Harry Edward Richard Ford, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Capt. John Meredith Randle Ford, Indian Army
Capt. Henry Marshall Fordham, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Eric Ford-Jones, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Frederick Richmond Forster, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Bernard Theobald Foss, Middlesex Regiment
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Harry William Foster, Royal Irish Rifles
Tmp Capt. Henry William Berkely Foster, Northumberland Fusiliers
Lt. Cuthbert Lloyd Fox, Royal Engineers
Capt. Harold Fox, London Regiment
Tmp Lt. Douglas Foxley Foxwell, Rifle Brigade
Lt. Hugh Douglas Peregrine Francis, Yeomanry
Tmp Lt. Robert Alfred Frank, East Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. Thomas Alderman Franklin, Bedfordshire Regiment
Lt. Joseph Nicholson Franks, Border Regiment
Tmp Capt. Angus Alexander Fraser, Army Service Corps
Capt. Andrew Knowles Fraser, Seaforth Highlanders
Capt. Cecil Fraser, North Staffordshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Gilbert Fraser, Royal Engineers
Capt. Simon Fraser, Royal Scots
Capt. Cecil Rayner Freeman, Northumberland Fusiliers
C.S. Maj. Esau John Fremlm, Grenadier Guards
Rev. Reginald French, Royal Army Chaplains' Department, Lancashire Fusiliers
2nd Lt. George Whitely Frend, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Jasper Gray Frere, Suffolk Regiment attd. Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Oliver Harry Frost, Middlesex Regiment and Royal Flying Corps
Capt. John Sidney Fulton, Lancashire Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Horace John Furminger, Border Regiment
Lt. Charles Guy Gaden, Connaught Rangers
Lt. Geoffrey Holroyd Gadsden, Northamptonshire Regiment
Lt. James Winton Garden, Royal Highlanders, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Lt. George Dudley Gardner, Yorkshire Regiment, and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Percy George Garon, Army Service Corps
Battery Sergeant Major Charles Henry Garraway, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Frank Harrold Garraway, London Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Arthur Edwin Garrison, York & Lancaster Regiment
Battery Sergeant Major Edward Garton, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. John Arthur Gascoyne-Cecil, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Hubert Douglas Gaunt, King's Own Yorkshire Light Infantry
Capt. Arthur William Gaze, London Regiment
Lt. Francis Stanley Gedye, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Nicholas Geldard, West Riding Regiment
2nd Lt. Harold Marriot Gell, Royal Engineers
Capt. James Dunlop Gemmill, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Herbert Horace, George, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Lawrence Unthank Geraty, RAMC
Capt. Lord Frederick John Gerard, Royal Horse Guards
Tmp Capt. Robert Gibbon, Manchester Regiment
Lt. Frederick Gibbons, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. William Percy Gibbons, Manchester Regiment
Lt. Arthur Gibbs, Welsh Guards
Rev. Andrew Gibson, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
2nd Lt. Charles Prosser Gibson, Royal Engineers
Capt. Colin William George Gibson, Royal Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Charles Gray Gosling Gilbert, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Thomas Fleming Gilkison, Royal Field Artillery
Act. Capt. Donald Gill, Royal Garrison Artillery
Rev. Robert Gillenders, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. John Gillespie, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. William John Gilpm, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt. Colin Macdonald Gilray, Rifle Brigade
2nd Lt. Rudolf Gjertsen, Essex Regiment
Tmp Capt. Keith Stewart Murray Gladstone, General List
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Arthur Ernest Glass, RAMC
2nd Lt. John McGowan Glen, Royal Scots, attd. Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Manwell Alexander Burns Glen Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Charles Edward Glenn, York & Lancaster Regiment
2nd Lt. Arthur Earnshaw Glentonr Welsh Regiment
Lt. John Bagot Glubb, Royal Engineers
Capt. Ralph George Campbell Glyn, Rifle Brigade
Capt. Robert Trevor Wallace-Glynn, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Ernest Gordon Godfrey, London Regiment
Tmp Lt. Howard Godfrey, Army Service Corps
Capt. Leslie Guy Gold, Hertfordshire Regiment
Lt. Claude John Dashwood Goldie, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Kenneth Thackeray Gooch, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Norton Butler Napier Good, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Tom Goodall, West Riding Regiment
Capt. Eric Whitlock Goodman, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Edward, Gordon, RAMC, Royal Highlanders
Tmp Lt. Grahame Massey Gordon, Royal Engineers
Capt. Ronald Eagleson Gordon, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Leonard Gorringe, General List
Capt. Hugh Henry Eyre Gosset, Royal Engineers
Capt. Philip Gottwaltz, South Wales Borderers
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Patrick Goudy, Royal Highlanders
Lt. Claud Goulder, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Arnold Charles Gover, Indian Army
2nd Lt. Charles James Graham, London Regiment
Capt. Douglas Alexander Henry Graham, Scottish Rifles
Tmp Capt. John Gibson Graham, Royal Scots Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Richard Grand, Norfolk Regiment
Lt. Clarence Welham Grange, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Frederick Grant, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Jokn Grant, Highland Light Infantry
Tmp Lt. John Robert Grant, Royal Engineers
Lt. Stuart Grant, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Thomas Francis Wiltshire Grant, Royal Engineers
Capt. David Logan Gray, Scottish Rifles
2nd Lt. Roderick Hubert Gray, Royal Artillery
Tmp Lt. Frederick Charles Green, Intelligence Corps
Capt. Frederick James Green MD RAMC
2nd Lt. William Charles Green, East Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. Wilfrid Arthur Greene, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
2nd Lt. Hugh Martin Greener, Northumberland Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Norman Greenslade, Devonshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Wilfrid Greensmith, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. William Foster Greenwood, Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. William Wells Greer MD FRCS RAMC
Tmp Capt. Ernest Walter Gregory, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Joseph Grellis, Border Regiment
Tmp Lt. Charles Grey, General List, Rhodesia National Regiment
Lt. Walter Barrett Joseph Grey, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. William Stanley Grice, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. James Henry Grieve, Army Ordnance Depot
Capt. John Cauldwell Grieve, RAMC
Tmp Capt. Cyril Cobham Griffith, Hampshire Regiment
Lt. Cyril John Ivor Griffith, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Gordon Grift Griffiths, Unatt. List, Royal Artillery
Tmp Capt. Kenyon Boxwell Griffith-Williams, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Sydney Alfred Groom, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Stewart Jewell Grose, Royal Field Artillery
Rev. St. John Beverly Groser, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. Edward Julian Groves, Cheshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Humphrey Halgrim Grundtvig, Leicestershire Regiment
Lt. Thomas Reginald Grylls, Leicestershire Regiment
Capt. Stanley Edward Gudgeon, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Richard Noel Guest, Royal Artillery
Capt. Haji Sulaiman Gulam-hossein Haji, Indian Medical Service
Tmp Lt. Eric McEvoy Gunning, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Derrick Wellesley Gunston, Irish Guards
Tmp Capt. William Ernest Gurry, Royal Engineers
Capt. Ivan Douglas Guthrie, Cavalry, Indian Army
Lt. Kenneth Malcolm Guthrie, Durham Light Infantry
Lt. Bernard Gordon Guy, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. John Richard Gwyther, Manchester Regiment
Tmp Capt. Leonard Leith Hadley MB RAMC
Lt. Eustace Charles Hagen, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Gordon Stewart Haggle, Northumberland Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Ernest Frank Hailstone, Royal Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Leslie Robert Halford, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Capt. Montague Walter Halford, Gloucestershire Regiment
Capt. Allan Gordon Hall, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Cecil William Hall, Army Service Corps
Lt. Lionel Cuthbert Hall, Royal Engineers
Lt. Reginald Clifford Hall, York & Lancaster Regiment
Tmp Capt. Ronald Owen Hall, General List
Lt. Robert Victor Hall, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Frederick Plassey Hallifax, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. Howard George Hallum, Hampshire Regiment
Capt. James Hamilton, Royal Scots Fusiliers
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Hamilton, Army Service Corps
Tmp Lt. Harry Thomas Hammond, Royal Fusiliers
Capt. Alfred Christopher Hammond-Searle, RAMC
2nd Lt. Arthur Cecil Hampson, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Stuart Hirst Hampson, Lancashire Fusiliers
Lt. Wilfred Hampson, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Eric James Hampton, Durham Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Noel Hector Hampton, Royal Sussex Regiment
Tmp Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Alexander Hanauer, Army Service Corps
2nd Lt. Harris Kirkland Handasyde, Royal Scots
2nd Lt. Arthur Sheldon Hands, Dorsetshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Neville Hands, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Lt. Robert William Hannah, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. William Alexander Hanton, Royal Engineers
Capt. Allan Francis Hardwick, London Regiment and Machine Gun Corps
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Edwin Harding, Royal Fusiliers
Capt. Fred Hardman, Manchester Regiment
Lt. Cyril Dupa Hardwick, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Thomas William Hardwick, West Yorkshire Regiment
Lt. Charles Cecil Harland, South Staffordshire Regiment
2nd Lt. William Thomas Harnott, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Sidney Harper, South Staffordshire Regiment
Capt. George James Reginald Harris, Liverpool Regiment
Tmp Capt. John Anthony Harris, Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Bernard Hope Harrison, Royal Munster Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Wilmot Earl Harry, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Frederick Hart, Welsh Regiment
2nd Lt. Joseph Aubrey Hart, East Surrey Regiment
Tmp Lt. Stanley Graham Hart, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Sydney Hartley, Worcestershire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Norman Holt Hartshorne, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Arthur Williams Harvey, East Surrey Regiment
Capt. Humphrey le Fleming Fairfax Harvey, Royal Field Artillery
Hon. Lt. Edward Higham Haslam, Army Ordnance Depot
Tmp Capt. John Fearby Campbell Haslam MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. Thomas Ernest Hastings, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Capt. Roger Bernard Lawson Hatch, Bedfordshire Regiment
Lt. Hubert Christopher Hatton-Hall, King's Own Scottish Borderers
Rev. William Thomas Havard, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Lt. Horace Stanley Havelock, Royal Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Arthur Joseph Hawes, RAMC
Capt. James Godfrey Hawkey-Shepherd, Yeomanry
2nd Lt. Kenneth Edwards Hawkins, Royal Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Longney Hawkins, King's African Rifles
Tmp Capt. Harold Granwell Aloysius Haynes, RAMC
Capt. Horace Penzer Haynes, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Frank Hay ward, Royal Engineers
Rev. Frederick John Hazledme, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
2nd Lt. Peter Charles Aislabie Head, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Max Herbert Hem, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Rev. George Francis Helm, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Capt. Garnet Montgomery Hume Henderson, Highland Light Infantry
Lt. Matthew Bolam Henderson, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Cecil Augustus John Hendriks, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Lt. Richard George Hennessy, Border Regiment
Capt. Thomas Hennessy, Rifle Brigade
Tmp Lt. William Ainsworth Henri, Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. William Gaudie Henry, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Arthur Frank Newman
Henstack, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. David Hepburn, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. George Stanley Hepburn, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Walter Herd, Royal Highlanders
Tmp Capt. Fredenck Joseph Herzog, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Albert Hesling, Lancashire Fusiliers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Alan Dickinson Hetherington, General List
Tmp Lt. Francis Herbert Hetherington, Seaforth Highlanders
Tmp Capt. Reginald Charles Hewson, East Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. Henry Frank Heywrood, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Frederick Hubert Hickman, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. William Longton Hicks, General List
Battery Sergeant Major Francis Alexander Higgins, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. William Samuel Higgins, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. John Norman Hildick-Smith, South Staffordshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Frederick James Hill, Royal Irish Rifles
Tmp Lt. Lindsay Arthur Hill, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt.William Ernest Hill, Middlesex Regiment
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. William Henry Hill, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Harold Drummond Hillier, Gloucestershire Regiment
Tmp Capt. George Tom Hilton, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. Richard Cop eland Dentocn Hind, Royal Sussex Regiment
Tmp Lt. Thomas Hinde, Rifle Brigade
Tmp Capt. John Tatham Hines, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Charles Allen Hinton, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Alexander David Hislop, Royal Engineers
Capt. Frank Bridge Hitchcock Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. Francis Brigstocke Hitchings, Devonshire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Francis Bromley Hobbs, Bedfordshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Howard Frederick Hobbs, attd. Welsh Regiment
Tmp Capt. Hugh George Hobson, RAMC
Capt. Matthew Hodgart, Royal Engineers
Lt. Alexander Phelps Hodges, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Edward Norman Hodges, Army Service Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Walter Frederick Clarke Holden, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Harold Thomas Holdstock, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Capt. Michael James Holland, King Edward's Horse
Tmp Capt. Tom Herbert Holland, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Edmund John Hunt Holley, Devonshire and Royal North Devonshire Yeomanry
Tmp Capt. Aubrey Hollingworth, General List
Lt. Harold McLean Hollingworth, Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Capit Rudolph Hollocombe, South Staffordshire Regiment
Lt. Geoffrey Holmes, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Hugh Oliver Holmes, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Gerald Holroyde, RAMC
Tmp Lt. Robert Kenneth Holt, Dorsetshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Percy Frederick Hone, General List
Tmp Capt. Hilary Ralph Hood, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt. Arthur Wellesley Hoodey, Army Service Corps
Capt. Alfred George Hooper, Lincolnshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Granville Hooper-Sharpe, Rhodedian Veterinary Service
Capt. Arthur Oswald James Hope, Coldstream Guards
Capt. Kelham Kirk Horn, Royal Flying Corps
Capt. Trevor Langdale Horn, Lancers
Capt. Alan Edgar Home, Yeomanry
Lt. Herbert Eric Horsfield, Royal Engineers
Capt. Cecil Dove Horsley, Lancers
2nd Lt. Leonard George Hosking, London Regiment
Lt. Henry Walter Houldsworth, Seaforth Highlanders
Capt. Herbert Hough, South Lancashire Regiment
2nd Lt. Frederick Leonard Houghton, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Bertram Beaman Houston, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. Robert Baldwin Hovey, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Frederick Ernest Howard, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Harry Safe Howard, Yorkshire Light Infantry
2nd Lt. Ronald Arthur Scovell Howes, South Lancashire Regiment
2nd Lt. Herbert Hubble, Rifle Brigade
Tmp Lt. Richard Melvil Fane Huddart, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Oromie Hudson, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. William Hudson, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Digby Huffam, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Cyril Thomas Hughes Royal Engineers
Capt. Daniel Joseph Hughes, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Capt. Leslie Edward Hughes, RAMC
Sgt. Major Walter Hughes, Grenadier Guards
Tmp C.S. Maj. Thomas Anthony Hughes, Army Service Corps
Tmp Lt. Lyman Sawley Hull, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Walter Grove Hull, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Charles Arthur Phillimore Hulls, Seaforth Highlanders, and Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Lt. Spencer Robert Humby, Royal Engineers
Capt. Harold Victor Hummel, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Henry Herbert Humphreys, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. John Nelson Humphrey MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. Gerald Norman Hunnybun, Yorkshire Regiment
Lt. Arthur Lionel Hunt, Royal Artillery
Tmp Capt. Geoffrey Hunt Hunt, Royal Engineers
Capt. William Hunt, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Douglas Macinnes Hunter MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. William Henry Hunter, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. Edward Mitchell Huntriss, West Riding Regiment
Lt. Edgar Simon Hurlbatt, Manchester Regiment
Lt. Percival Hurlbutt, Yeomanry Battalion, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Capt. Thomas Hutchesson, Royal Guernsey Light Infantry
Rev. Hugh William Hutehings, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Lt. Herbert Heatley Hutchinson, Royal Garrison Artillery
Rev. Samuel Hutchinson, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. Cecil Tait Hutchison, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. George John Hutchison, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. David Lindsay Hutton, RAMC
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Sherrin Huxley, attd. Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Henry David Hyams, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Howard Leahe Hyett, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Douglas Edward Ince, Durham Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Norman Sedgwick Ince, Manchester Regiment
Capt. Thomas Douglas Inch MB RAMC
Capt. Joseph Ellis Inglis, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Kenneth Guthrie Ireland, Royal Artillery
Tmp Lt. Leonard Archibald Frederick Ireland, Royal Sussex Regiment
Rev. Henry Massingberd Irvin, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Lt. Basil Hippisley Jackson, Royal Horse Artillery
Lt. Clement Jackson, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Guy Rolf Jackson, Yeomanry
Capt. Harold Bravence Jackson, East Yorkshire Regiment
Lt. Harold Jackson, Manchester Regiment
Lt. Lindsay Forbes Jackson, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Adrian Ingram James, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Harold Morton James, Middlesex Regiment
Lt. Walter Richmond James, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Charles Henry Jarvis, Northumberland Fusiliers
Capt. Thomas Kilvington Jeans, Royal Horse Artillery
Tmp Capt. Ernest Edward Jelbart, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Tmp Lt. Edgar Ernest Jenkins, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Gerald Kerr Jenkins, Royal Field Artillery
Battery Sergeant Major Percy John Jenkins, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Robert Jennings, Royal Scots
Lt. Reginald Herbert Jerman, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Charles Edward Jiggms, Royal Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Anthony Joseph Jimenez, Royal West Kent Regiment
Lt. Robert Howard Jobson, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Maurice Richard Johannessen, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Oscar Claridge Johnsen, General List
Capt. Dudley Graham Johnson DSO South Wales Borderers
Tmp Capt. Edgar Harry Johnson, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Tmp Lt. Gordon Ross Johnson, Royal Engineers
Hon. Lt. Harry Bertram Johnson, Army Ordnance Corps
Lt. Rayner Harvey Johnson, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Alexander le Burn Johnston, Royal Engineers
Capt. Lewis Downsh Joll, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Archibald Henry Jolhffe, Cheshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Arthur Leslie Jones, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Arthur Llewellyn Jones, East Surrey Regiment
Tmp Lt. Ernest Sidney Jones, Army Ordnance Depot
Capt. George Worthington Jones, Royal Horse Artillery
Tmp Capt. Glyn Mostyn Jones, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Herbert Brian Jones, Wiltshire Regiment
R.S. Maj. John Owen Jones, Cheshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. John Robetnt Jones, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. John Thomas Jones, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. Percy Lewis Jones, Royal Garrison Artillery
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Philip Henry Jones, Lincolnshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Robert Arthur Jones, Norfolk Regiment
Tmp Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Thomas Jacob Jones, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Lt. Albert Edward Jordan, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. John Reginald Claridge Jorgensen, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Robert Charles Jull, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt. Robert Louis Kay, Cheshire Regiment
Lt. Reginald Joseph Kaye, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. James William Keating, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Thomas Keay, Lancashire Fusiliers
Lt. William Esm Kelly, Border Regiment
Lt. Charles Hall Kelsall, Lancashire Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Luther James Kedsey, South Staffordshire Regiment
Lt. John Henry Kemp, Army Service Corps
Lt. Ernest Elliott Kennedy, Indian Army
Capt. Bertram Maurice Kenny, Royal West Surrey Regiment
Capt. Joseph Robert Kenyon, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. John Bertram Keville, Royal Artillery
Capt. Gordon Cecil Kennard, Royal Engineers
Lt. Lord Hugh Kennedy, Coldstream Guards
Lt. James Russell Kennedy, Royal Garrison Artillery
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Herbert John Kent, London Regiment
Capt. Tom Raonsden Kenworthy, RAMC
2nd Lt. Arthur Oliver Kersey, Shropshire Light Infantry
Capt. Hew Ross Kilner, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Brian Arthur Douglas Kinahan, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Stanley Lancaster Kind, York & Lancaster Regiment
2nd Lt. Bernard Ellis King, Norfolk Regiment
Tmp Lt. Cecil Bishop Redman King, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Charles Stuart King, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. Edward Goddard King, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Hugh Basil King, Northamptonshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Herbert Greniell King, Northumberland Fusiliers
Capt. Harold Lepme Kirby, Royal Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Henry McKenzie Kirkby, Army Ordnance Depot
Capt. Colin Drummond Kirkpatrick, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. William Kirkwood, Royal Scots
Tmp Lt. William Campbell Kirkwood, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Ahck Edmond Knight MB RAMC
Lt. Royston Engleheart Knight, Royal Engineers
Lt. Walham Thomas Knight, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Frederick Hammett Knott, Wiltshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Roger Birkbecfe Knott, Lancashire Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Alexander Campbell White Knox MB RAMC
Tmp Lt. Edward Ritchie Knox, Royal Artillery
Tmp Lt. Jean Antoine Kurten, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt. Thomas Butler Labarte, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. George Thomas Labey, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Wallace Laing, Royal Artillery
Tmp Capt. James Martin Laird Royal Field Artillery
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Ernest Kirkland Laman, South Wales Borderers
Tmp Lt. Christopher Lambeth, Army Service Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Mortimer William Henry Lancaster, South Wales Borderers
Lt. John Langler, Royal Artillery, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. John Athelstane Trend Langdon, North Staffordshire Regiment
Capt. Walter George Largen, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Arthur Moore Lascelles, Durham Light Infantry
Capt. William Henry Laslett MB RAMC
Lt. Charles Latrobe, Hampshire Regiment
Battery Sergeant Major Alexander Lauder, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Joseph Henry Laurie, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Capt. Hou Henry Astell Law, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Rev. James Henry Adeane Law, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Lt. Charles Alfred Lawrence, Bedfordshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. John Wilson Lawson, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Brereton Lawton-Goodman, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. Charles Laycock, Royal Engineers
Capt. Stanley Charles Layzell, Intelligence Department
2nd Lt. Eric George Leader, Royal Engineers
Capt. James Allan Gordon Leask, Royal Lancaster Regiment
Lt. David Henry Leek, Border Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Capt. Charles Henry Lee, Manchester Regiment
Capt. James Lyell Lee, Lancashire Fusiliers
2nd Lt. James Vernon Lee, Yeomanry
Capt. Ralph Trenchard Leo, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Alec Antony Lees, RAMC
Tmp Lt. George Poingdestre Lefebvre, Northumberland Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Edmund Charles le Good, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. John Alexander Leigh, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. John Walter Dickinson Leigh, Army Cyclist Battalion and Royal Flying Corps
Capt. Reginald Heber Leigh, RAMC
Lt. Douglas Meldrum Watson Leith, Gordon Highlanders
Tmp Capt. Hubert Francis Augustine le Mesurier, Cheshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Eric Smithyman Lennard, Tank Corps
Tmp Capt. Arthur Stanley le Rossignol, General List
Lt. Alexander Addis Leslie, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Cecil George Leslie, Dragoon Guards
Tmp Capt. Oswald Edward Henry Leslie, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Rupert John Leversha, Yeomanry
2nd Lt. William Egbert Leveson, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Carl Norton Levin, Northumberland Fusiliers
Lt. Ralph Paul Levy, Middlesex Regiment
C.S. Maj. John Arthur Lewis, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Goroorwy Claude Lewis, Tank Corps
Tmp Capt. Max Lewis, General List
Tmp Lt. William Lewthwaite, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Lt. Cecil Frederick Joseph Liddell, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Tmp Capt. Frank Horace Liddell, General List, frmly, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Guy Maynard Liddell, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Kenneth Thomas Lambery, RAMC
Lt. John William Lincoln, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. James Henry Coddington Lindesay, Army Cyclist Corps
2nd Lt. Bernard Lindop, Cheshire Regiment
Capt. Leslie Stuart Lindsey-Renton, London Regiment
R.S. Maj. William Lightfoot, Border Regiment
Lt. Archibald John Child Lintott, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Percy Collins Litchfield, RAMC
Tmp Capt. Joscelme William Littleton, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. John Jestyn Llewellin, Royal Garrison Artillery
Rev. Herbert Thomas Lloyd, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Lt. Robert Llewellyn Mandeville Lloyd, Shropshire Light Infantry
Capt. William Alexander Charles Lloyd, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Griffith Ellis Lloyd-Jones, East Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Geoffrey Denis Lock, Devonshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Thomas Percy Locking, New Armies
Act. Capt. Geoffrey Owen Lockwood, Royal Engineers
Lt. Luckey Lockwood, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. George Sherwin Lockwood, Lancashire Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Conrad Loddiges, RAMC
2nd Lt. James Logan, Royal Engineers
Capt. Joshue Arthur Barber Lomax, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Norman Veatch Lothian MB RAMC
Capt. Harry Leslie Bache Lovatt, South Staffordshire Regiment
Capt. William Muncaster Lovatt, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt. Frederick Stephen Low, Royal Field Artillery
Act. Major William Alexander Low, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Frederick William Lown, Tank Corps
Lt. Geoffrey Grant Lowndes, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Norman Charles Leslie Lowth, Lancashire Fusiliers
Lt. Ralph Hugh Lubbock, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. John de Blaquiere Tindall Lucas, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Reginald Hutchison Lucas, RAMC
Tmp Lt. Alan Lumb, Royal Artillery, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Arthur Douglas Lumb, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. George James Sanderson Lumsden, Cameron Highlanders
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Richard Lumsden, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Tmp Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Arthur Patrick Lunam, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Reginald Owton Lunn, Labour Corps
Rev. David Colville Lusk, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Capt. Peter Young Lyle, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Capt. William James Lyle, Highland Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Charles Gabriel Joseph Lynam, Royal Engineers
Lt. Alfred Cecil Lynn, Yorkshire Light Infantry
C.S. Maj. Richard Mabbott, Royal Fusiliers
Lt. Herbert Carteighe Maben, Worcestershire Regiment
Tmp Capt. James Chateau McArthur, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. James Simpson McArthur, General List, late King's Own Scottish Borderers
Tmp Capt. Donald Boyd Macaulay, Seaforth Highlanders
Lt. William Robert Brown McBain, Royal Field Artillery and Royal Flying Corps
Lt. William James McBeath, Highland Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Frederick Johnston McCall, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
2nd Lt. David McCarthy, Liverpool Regiment
2nd Lt. Thomas George McCarthy, London Regiment
2nd Lt. Tyndall McClelland, Highland Light Infantry
Capt. Charles McCombie, Gordon Highlanders
Tmp Capt., William McConnell MB RAMC
Capt. Henry Ernest McCready MD RAMC
Tmp Capt. Thomas Robert McCready, Royal Marines, and Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. James Thompson McCubbin, Liverpool Regiment
2nd Lt. David John McCullough, Royal Irish Rifles
2nd Lt. Alexander MacDonald, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Lt. Andrew Garfield MacDonald, London Regiment
Lt. John Alexander MacDonald, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Douglas James McDougall, Royal Scots
Capt. Thomas McEwen, RAMC
Tmp Capt. John Mandeville MacFie MB RAMC
Lt. William Richard Arundel McGee, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Jackson McGowan, Army Ordnance Depot
Lt. James Allister McGregor, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Lt. Cyril Michael McHale, South Lancashire Regiment
Lt. Alfred Charles McIntosh, Royal Engineers
Lt. Douglas Bentley McIntosh, Liverpool Regiment
Capt. Reginald George Macintyre, Durham Light Infantry
Lt. Robert Hamilton Montgomery McIntyre, Yeomanry
Tmp Capt. William Keverall McIntyre MB RAMC
Lt. Norman Balfour McIvor, Middlesex Regiment
Tmp Capt. Magnus Ross Mackay MB RAMC, attd. Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Arthur Murdo Mackenzie, Royal Engineers
Lt. Donald Ross Mackenzie, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. lan Dawson Mackenzie, Royal Dublin Fusiliers
Lt. Henry Erskine McKie, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. John Wallace MacKinlay, Scottish Rifles
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. David McLachlan, Royal Highlanders
Tmp 2nd Lt. James Menzies MacLachlan, General List, attd. Trench Mortar Battery
Capt. Thomas McLaren, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. George Hugh Maclear, Cheshire Regiment
Lt. James Younger McLean, Royal Field Artillery and Royal Flying Corps
Capt. Ronald MacLear, attd. Army Service Corps
B.Q.M. Sgt. William Laidlow MacLean, Royal Scots Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Kenneth Thomas McLelland, Royal Engineers
Capt. Kenneth MacLennan, RAMC
Lt. James McMichael, Highland Light Infantry
Lt. John MacMurray, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Robert McMurray, Royal Engineers
Capt. Arthur Thomas McMurrough-Kavanagh, Hussars
R.S. Maj. Morgan George McNama, Connaught Rangers
Tmp Lt. John McNicholl, Seaforth Highlanders
Lt. Malcolm McNicholl, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Charles Ogte Maconachie, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Edmiston MacGregor MacQuarrie, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. James McWilliam, Liverpool Regiment
Tmp Capt. Percy Hamilton Maflin, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Collin Arthur Maguire, Royal Engineers
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Thomas Mahony, Royal Irish Regiment
2nd Lt. William John Maidment, Welsh Regiment
Tmp Capt. Sidney John Male, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Joseph Rupert Malbon, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Clifford Angus Mallam, Royal Berkshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Herbert Reginald Mallett, Middlesex Regiment
2nd Lt. Robert Maltby, Lancashire Fusiliers
Rev. Leslie George Mannering, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Battery Sergeant Major William Marchant, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt. Arthur Ronald Mares, Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp Q.M. and Hon. Lt. John William Marriott, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Tmp R.S. Maj. William David Marsden, Northamptonshire Regiment
Capt. Frank Douglas Marsh, RAMC
Tmp Lt. Charles William Marshall, Liverpool Regiment
Capt. Edward Nixon Marshall, West Riding Regiment
Tmp Capt. Eric Stewart Marshall, RAMC
Capt. Harold Marshall, Hampshire Regiment
Lt. Leslie Phillips Marshall, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Frederic Edward Marston, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Howard de Courcy Martelh, Royal Army Chaplains' Department, attd. 62nd Division
Tmp Lt. Ernest Wilfred Leigh Martin, 24th Divisional Train
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Richard Henry Martin, Monmouthshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Clive Harrison Martyn, Northamptonshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Graham William Massingham, Army Service Corps
Lt. Reginald Frank Mason, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Edgar Alan Masters, Army Service Corps
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Frederick William Masters, Lincolnshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. James Frederick Matheson MB RAMC
Tmp Lt. Felton Arthur Hamilton Mathew, Royal Engineers
Lt. Alexander, John Mathieson, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Frederick Keith Matthew, North Lancashire Regiment
2nd Lt. Percy Thomas Matthews, London Regiment
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. John Hannaford Maunder, RAMC
Tmp Lt. Hugh Rochfort Maxsted, General List
Tmp Lt. Arthur Lionel May, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Capt. John Edwin Maynard, London Regiment
2nd Lt. William Herbert Lisle Medford, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Ernest Anthony Meek, Durham Light Infantry
Capt. Robert Meiklejohn, Army Service Corps
Rev. Charles Gustave Clark Meister, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Barnett Mennie, Cheshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Horace George Merriok, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Mark Hepper Merry, Welsh Regiment
Tmp Capt. Charles Campbell Metcalfe, General List
Lt. Everard Charles Meynell, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. William Charles Frederick Meyrick, Devonshire Regiment
Lt. William Godwin Michelmore, Royal Engineers
Lt. Rupert Charles Godfrey Middleton, Royal Sussex Regiment
Lt. Stanley Wayman Milburn, Headquarters, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Arthur Tremayne Miles, King's African Rifles
Tmp Lt. Brynmor Miles, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Archibald Underwood Millar MB RAMC
Capt. John Miller, RAMC
Capt. James Bruce Miller, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Percy Maurice Miller, Royal Irish Rifles
Tmp Capt. Edgar Edward Mills, South Wales Borderers
Capt. Frederick Leighton Victor Mills, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Lacey Burchett Mills, East Surrey Regiment
2nd Lt. Stanley Wayre Mills, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Harold Aubrey Milton, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Frank Miskin, Suffolk Regiment
Tmp Lt. James Hendrie Mitchell, Border Regiment
Tmp Capt. John Malcolm Mitchell, General List
Tmp Sub Lt. Lionel George Mitchelmore, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Tmp Lt. George Hamilton Moberly, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Stanley Moffett, Northumberland Fusiliers
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Joseph Patrick Mogam, East Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. John Donald Mollett, Royal Engineers
Lt. Caryl Richard Molyneux, 10th Hussars
Lt. John Henry Monaghan, Leinster Regiment
Lt. Hugh Benyon Monier-Williams, Suffolk Regiment
Tmp Lt. Henry William John Monk, Royal Engineers
Capt. Frederick James Osbaldeston Montagu, Coldstream Guards
Capt. Monthermer Stanley Hume Montague, East African Forces
Capt. Eustace William Montgomerie, Norfolk Regiment
Tmp Lt. Francis James Dudingston Montgomerie, Royal Engineers
Capt. Robert Vandeleur Montgomery, Somerset Light Infantry
2nd Lt. Phillips Burney Sterndale Gybbon Monypenny, Royal West Kent Regiment
Lt. Mark Sprot, Moody-Stuart, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Claud Augustus Moore, Royal Fusiliers
Capt. Cedric Gell Moore, Manchester Regiment
Lt. Harry Andrew Moore, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. John Francis Cumberlege Mordaunt, Somerset Light Infantry
Tmp Lt. Gerald Alexander McKay Morant, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. James Sharah Hunuford Morgan, King's African Rifles
Tmp Capt. Montagu Trovers Morgan, RAMC, attd. King's African Rifles
Lt. Sydney Hubert Morgan, Royal Engineers
Lt. Charles Stewart Morice, Worcestershire Regiment, and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Frederick Alexander Morrell, East Kent Regiment
2nd Lt. Thomas Morrill, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. Arthur Frank Morris, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Thomas Hooper Morns, Royal Engineers
Rev. William Frederick Morns, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
2nd Lt. Charles Esmond Morrisoin, Leicestershire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Reginald Sperling Morshead MB RAMC
2nd Lt. Alfred Ellenngton Morton, Royal Lancaster Regiment
Tmp Capt. Ralph Morton, Lancashire Fusiliers
Lt. David William Moss, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. Edward Mount, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. William Samuel Mounteney, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. John Alexander Mowat, Hampshire Yeomanry, attd. Hampshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Patrick Desmond Mulholland, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. William Mulholland, Mil. Lab. Bur
2nd Lt. Robert Mullaney, Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Douglas Graham Munro, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Capt. James Stewart Grahahm Munro, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. John James Munro, Royal Engineers
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Benjamin Murdoch, Royal Scots
Capt. William Murdoch MB RAMC
Lt. Charles Alexander Phipps Murison, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Arthur John Murphy, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. John William Mnse, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Hanley Musker, Lancashire Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Ernest Francis Hume Murray, Honourable Artillery Company
Tmp 2nd Lt. George Scott Murray, General List and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Q.M. and Hon. Lt. John Grant Murray, Royal Marines, attd. Field Ambulance
Tmp Lt. Patrick Moncreiff Murray, General List, attd. Infantry Brigade
Tmp Capt. William Patrick Murray, Northumberland Fusiliers
Capt. Charles William Chester Myles MB RAMC
Capt. Ian Couper Nairn, Yeomanry
Tmp Lt. Reginald Lancelot Naah, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Robert Percy Nathan, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. John Neal, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Charles James Neale, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Alfred Owen Needham, Lancashire Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. John Barrie Neilson, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Andrew Edmondson Walsh Nesbitt, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. James Edmund Henderson Nevalle, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
2nd Lt. Frederick Newcomb, Hampshire Regiment
Capt. John Geoffrey Newell, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Q.M. and Hon. Capt. James Newton, Royal Irish Rifles
Tmp Capt. George McLaughlm Niccol, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Charles Brian Nichols, Suffolk Regiment
Capt. James Nichols, London Regiment
Capt. Morres Nickalls, Yeomanry
Tmp Lt. Edwin Nickerson, Royal Engineers
Capt. Ralph Kenneth Taylor Nightingale, Lancashire Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Stuart Henry Nooks, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Stanley Node-Miller, Royal Highlanders
Lt. Reginald Edward Norrds, Rifle Brigade, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Lt. Thomas Pilkington Norris, Royal Engineers
Rev. Phillip Mary Northcoite, Royal Army Chaplains' Department, attd. Cheshire Regiment
Capt. Francis John Nugee, Leicestershire Regiment
2nd Lt. Maurice Twemilow Nunnerley, Lancashire Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Edmund Roy Nurse, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Lt. Mervyn Alexander MacGregor Oakford, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Sydney Edward Odgers, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Sidney O'Donel, Mob Vet Sec, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
C.S. Maj. Charles O'Donovan, Royal Fusiliers
Act. Sgt. Major Walter George Ogden, Army Ordnance Corps
2nd Lt. Maurice Tremble Ogilvie, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. Cyril Okell, Field Company, Royal Engineers
Lt. William Mathias O'Kelly, Army Service Corps
Rev. Henry Douglas Oldfield, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Capt. William Joshua Oliver, Durham Light Infantry
Tmp Lt. John Stuart Omond, Army Ordnance Depot
2nd Lt. Edward Freer Orgill, North Staffordshire Regiment, attd. Manchester Regiment
2nd Lt. John Augustus Oriel, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt. Henry Ormandy, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Vernon Winton Ory, Army Service Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Ernest John Osborn, General List, and Trench Mortar Battery
Tmp Lt. Thomas Broadbent Osbourne, Cable Section, Royal Engineers
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Robert William John Osmond, Middlesex Regiment
2nd Lt. Andrew Geraint Joseph Owen, Welsh Regiment
Capt. Herbert Charles Owen, Middlesex Regiment
Capt. Walter Hayes Oxley, Royal Engineers
Lt. James Leslie Padmore, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Arthur Frederick Page, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Parker Sutton Page, Royal Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Albert Arthur Painting, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Ridley Pakenham-Pakenham-Walsh, Royal Engineers
Capt. Edward Chippendall Palmer, West Riding Regiment
Battery Sergeant Major William Palmer, Royal Garrison Artillery
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Walter Palmerr King's Royal Rifle Corps
2nd Lt. Charlie Pannall, Royal West Surrey Regiment
Tmp Capt. Arthur George Pardoe, Royal Engineers, Royal Monmouthshire Regiment
Lt. John Brown Park, Scottish Rifles, attd. Cameron Highlanders
Lt. George Henry Parker, Royal Artillery, and Gold Coast Regiment
2nd Lt. Cecil Joseph Parker, Royal Engineers
Lt. Robert Parker, North Lancashire Regiment attd. Light Trench Mortar Battery
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Sidney Parker, Worcestershire Regiment
2nd Lt. John Parkin, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. George Westhead Parkinson, Royal Engineers (formerly North Lancashire Regiment)
2nd Lt. John Bertram Parks, Essex Regiment, attd. 2nd New Zealand Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. William Hamilton Parnisr East Kent Regiment
2nd Lt. Arthur Cyril Lawes Parry, Yorkshire Regiment, attd. Royal Lancaster Regiment
Tmp Capt. Guy William Parry, RAMC
Lt. Charles Roy Parsons, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Lt. Harold Archer James Parsons, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. John Henry Parsons, Yeomanry
2nd Lt. Robert Henderson Parsons Royal Engineers
Lt. Thomas Crompton Parsons, East Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Richard Douglas Passey MB RAMC, attd. King's Royal Rifle Corps
Lt. Christopher Parvin, Border Regiment
Tmp Capt. Montgomery Paterson Paton MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. William McCutcheon Patrick, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. William Cyril Paul, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Charles Frederick Pavitt, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. Sydney Archibald Payne, York & Lancaster Regiment
Tmp Lt. Henry Goold Pearce, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Cecil Pearson, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Frank Stanley Pearson, Dorsetshire Regiment, attd. East Lancashire Regiment
Capt. Robert Tute Pearson, Army Service Corps
Capt. Philip John Sherwin Pearson-Gregory, Grenadier Guards
2nd Lt. Thomas Edward Peart, Durham Light Infantry
Tmp 2nd Lt. Nicholas Arthington Pease, East Surrey Regiment
Lt. Charles Urie Peat, Yeomanry
Lt. Ronald Tennyson Peel, Seaforth Highlanders
Tmp Capt. Harold Benjamin Pegrum, Lancashire Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Richard Laurence Stapylton Pernberton, Durham Light Infantry
Lt. George Tresham Pender, Indian Army
Lt. John Hawkes Pendered MB FRCS RAMC
Tmp Capt. Edgar Ambrose Pengelly, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Arthur Robert Penny, and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Capt. Helier George Percival, Welsh Regiment
Lt. John Lakeman Percival, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Sydney Cockerill Percival, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Gerard Henry Perkins, Yorkshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Richard Edgecumbe Perrett, London Regiment
Lt. Eric Wingfield Pert, Royal Engineers
Capt. Henry Sydney Charles Peyton, Rifle Brigade
Tmp 2nd Lt. Richard Charles Philipp, Royal Engineers
Lt. Cecil Ernest Lucas Phillips, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. Clive Alexander Phillips, Honourable Artillery Company
Tmp Capt. Edwin Gray Moneylaws Phillips, Royal Highlanders
Tmp Capt. Frank Phillips, General List
Lt. Stephen Noel Hamilton Phillips, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Edward Clement Philpott, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Hugh Alfred Philpott, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Thomas Picton, South Wales Borderers, attd. Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Capt. Wilfred Gould Pidsley, London Regiment
Lt. Gerald Robert Pirn, Royal Engineers
Capt. Harold Senhouse Pinder, Leicestershire Regiment, attd. King's African Rifles
Hon. Capt. Hugh Lewis Pine, Army Ordnance Depot
Capt. Ivan Miller Pirrie MB RAMC
Lt. Howard Earl Pitt, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Robert Elliot Pitts, RAMC
Capt. Harvey Forshaw Plant, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Samuel Platten, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Leslie Graham Plumbly, Bedfordshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Geoffrey Howard Plummer, Royal Irish Rifles, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Lt. John Edward Barker Plummer, Liverpool Regiment
Tmp Lt. Asher Price, HTown Regiment
Tmp Capt. Axel Jonas Alfred Poignant, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. William Arnold Polglaze, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Leopold Thomas Poole MB RAMC
Tmp Lt. Reginald Alfred Beisly Pope, Motor Machine Gun Corps
Lt. George Basil Porter, British West Indies Regiment
Tmp Lt. Harold Edward Lionel Porter, Royal Engineers
Lt. William Abbotts Porter, North Staffordshire Regiment
Capt. William Edge Porter, Leicestershire Regiment
Lt. Benjamin Henry Potter, Royal Garrison Artillery, attd. Army Ordnance Depot
Tmp Lt. Frank Thomas Potter, Army Ordnance Depot
2nd Lt. George Edwin Potter, Hussars, attd. King's Royal Rifle Corps
Tmp Capt. Gordon Alan Potts, Lancashire Fusiliers
C.S. Maj. William Powell, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Tmp Lt. Charles Montague Power, Scottish Rifles
2nd Lt. Herbert Raphe Power, West Riding Regiment attd. Gloucestershire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Albert Maurice Pratt, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Reginald Stanley Pratt, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment, attd. Trench Mortar Battery
Lt. Evan Bertram Charles Preston, Indian Army Reserve of Officers, attd. Indian Infantry
Lt. Frederick Allen Preston, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Overton Inett Preston, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment and Royal Flying Corps
Capt. Harold Pretty, Suffolk Regiment
Capt. Harry Sibree Price, London Regiment
Capt. Charles Stafford Price-Davies, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Tmp Capt. Edward Andrews Priestland, King's African Rifles
Lt. Jonathan Lee Priestman, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Evan Pritchard, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Geoffrey John Pritchard, Royal Engineers
Capt. Richard George Proby, Yeomanry
Tmp Capt. John Clifford Proctor, Gloucestershire Regiment
Lt. John, Norman William Atkinson Procter, West Riding Regiment
Tmp Lt. Roderick Norman Lloyd Protheroe, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. George Raphael Buick Puree MB RAMC
Capt. Hedley Thomas Wright Quick, Royal Berkshire Regiment
Capt. Berkeley Campbell Quill, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Scottish Horse Yeomanry)
Lt. Charles Goldie Radcliffe, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. John Norman Radcliffe, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Thomas Townsend Radmore, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Cecil Probyn Napier Raikes, Royal Engineers
Capt. Adam Rankme MB RAMC
2nd Lt. Albert Morrison Ransom, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Lt. Ralph Albert Raphael, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Frank Louis Ratto, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Tmp 2nd Lt. George Norman Rawlence, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry
Lt. George William Rawlings, Royal Engineers, attd. Labour Corps
C.S. Maj. William Benjamin Rawlings, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Harold Raymond, General List
Capt. Richard Valentine Read, Essex Regiment
2nd Lt. Wilbam Read, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Tmp Lt. Frederick Albert Reading, Worcestershire Regiment
2nd Lt. Ernest Join Readings, Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. Ernest George Redway, Royal Irish Regiment
Tmp Capt. August George Rehm, General List, East Africa Pay Corps
2nd Lt. Archibald Reid, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Alexander Eraser Reid, Royal Engineers
Lt. Doug-las Muir Reid, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Horace Arthur Reid, Royal Engineers, attd. Australian Engineers
2nd Lt. John Reid, Royal Highlanders
Lt. John Spence Read, South Staffordshire Regiment
Lt. Norman Reid, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Q.M. and Hon. Lt. William Reid, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. William Brown Rennie, General List
Tmp Capt. Walter Lancaster Renwick, Labour Corps
Lt. Roy Alfred Rice, Indian Army, attd. Lancers
Capt. Leslie John Richards, Suffolk Regiment
Tmp Lt. Mark Fielding Richards, Suffolk Regiment
C.S. Maj. Arthur Edward Richardson, Rifle Brigade
Capt. Harry Richardson, Royal Engineers
Lt. Roland Richardson, Cokes Rifles attd. Pathans, Indian Army
Lt. George Arthur Rdckards, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Sydney Riddell, York & Lancaster Regiment
Capt. Arthur George Rigby, West Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. Thomas Ridgwiay, South Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Ralph Musk Ridley, Suffolk Regiment
Tmp Lt. Harold Riley, Royal Engineers
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Thomas Riley, West Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. Oswald Harbord Ripley, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Arthur Roberts, Royal Engineers
Capt. Charles Eustace Roberts, Northamptonshire Regiment, and Nigeria Regiment
2nd Lt. Donald Farquharson Roberts, East Surrey Regiment
2nd Lt. Eric Mark Roberts, Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Harold Roberts, South Staffordshire Regiment
Capt. James Ronald Roberts, Royal Engineers, attd. Railway Corps
Tmp Capt. William Roberts, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Angus Robertson, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt.Alexander Wmton Robertson, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Brian Hubert Robertson, Royal Engineers
Lt. Cyril John Robertson, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Donald Stewart Robertson, South Lancashire Regiment
Capt. Hector Murdoch Maxwell Robertson, Royal Artillery, attd. Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Leonard Dougal Robertson, King's Own Scottish Borderers
Tmp Capt. William Berry Robertson, General List
Capt. William Henderson Robertson, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. William Latto Robertson MB Field Amb, RAMC
Tmp Lt. Christopher Robinson, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Tmp Lt. Cecil Joseph Robinson, Royal Field Artillery, attd. Survey Company, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Frederick Henry Robinson, Lincolnshire Regiment, and Nigeria Regiment
Lt. Godfrey Robinson, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Leslie Maurice Robinson, Lancashire Fusiliers
Capt. Thomas Robinson, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. John Stanley Jefferson Robson, Northumberland Fusiliers, attd. Army Cyclist Corps
Capt. Maurice James Roche MB Indian Medical Service
Tmp Capt. John Moyes Rodd, Army Ordnance Depot
C.S. Maj. Robert Rodger, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Albert Rodwell, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Edward Allen Roe, East Surrey Regiment, attd. Royal West Surrey Regiment
Tmp Lt. John Alfred Rogers, East Surrey Regiment
Sgt. Major Leslie Rogers, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Capt. Cecil John Rogerson MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. Alfred Rollo, General List
2nd Lt. Anton Eric Romyn, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Percy Roscorla, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. William Leonard Roseveare, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Launcelot Hugh Ross, General List
Tmp 2nd Lt. Peter Graham Ross, East Lancashire Regiment
Capt. Ronald Deane Ross, Irish Horse
Capt. Hubert James Cecil Rostron, Dragoon Guards
Tmp Lt. Philip Rought, Royal Engineers
Capt. Francis Leyland Lyster Fyler Roupell, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Hugh Shearer Rowan, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt. Josiah Arthur Vivian Rowe, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. George Kowell, Army Service Corps
2nd Lt. John Sumner Rowley, Leicestershire Regiment
C.S. Maj. John James Rowson, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Tmp Capt. John Hewitt Roxburgh, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Capt. Dennis Carlton Royle, Royal Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Gordon Wilfred Ritchie Rudkin, RAMC
Tmp Capt. Alexander Walter Runciman, Royal Engineers
Capt. Alexander Russell, Mil. Lab. Bur
Capt. Charles Cooper Russell, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Edmund Uniacke Russell, RAMC
Tmp Capt. George Black Russell, Royal Scots
Capt. Herbert Russell, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Hugh Russell, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Reginald Owen Russell, Royal West Kent Regiment
Capt. Thomas Foster Rutledge, Royal Flying Corps Spec. Reserve
Lt. Charles Cedric Ryan, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Martin Ryan, Royal Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. William Tuke Sainsbury, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Frederick John Salmon, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. (Local) Herbert Charles Salter, Intelligence Corps
2nd Lt. Ernest Lambert Samuel, Honourable Artillery Company
Tmp Lt. William Young-Sandeman, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. William Roger Sangumetti, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Hugh le Gallienne Sarchet, Royal Berkshire Regiment
2nd Lt. John Bycroft Saul, Yorkshire Light Infantry, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Rev. Charles James Saunders, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Sgt. Major Arthur Albert Savage, Lancers
Lt. Alfred Cecil Savill, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Henry Bourchier Wrey Savile, Middlesex Regiment
Lt. Walter Savory, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Alfred Henry Sayer, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Herbert James Scales, General List and Royal Flying Corps
Sgt. Major George Arthur Scarff, Scots Guards
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. John James Schooling, Somerset Light Infantry
Lt. Frank Arthur Sclater, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Adrian Gilbert Scott, Royal Engineers
Capt. Alexander Scott, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Tmp 2nd Lt. Duncan Scott, Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. James Scott, Somerset Light Infantry
Capt. James Bruce Scott, Punjabis, Indian Army
Tmp Capt. Walter Henderson Scott, RAMC, attd. Durham Light Infantry
Capt. William Fowler Fraser Scott, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt. William Walter Scott-Moncrieff, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Arthur Scragg, Army Service Corps
Capt. Wilfred Arthur Seaman, Royal Engineers
Capt. William Seaton, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Lt. Robert Edward Watson Semple, Royal Artillery, attd. Trench Mortar Battery
2nd Lt. Harold Serginson, attd. Trench Mortar Battery
Capt. Hugh Eric Seth Seth-Smith, Royal Irish Rifles Spec. Reserve
Tmp Lt. Claud Ramsay Wilmot Seton, Motor Machine Gun Corps
Lt. William Eric Lewis Seward, Royal Flying Corps Spec. Reserve
Capt. John Arthur Gordon Shanks, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Capt. Francis Henry Shannons, Welsh Regiment
Lt. Henry Shapcott, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. Matthew Sharp, London Regiment
Lt. Eric George Sharpe, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. William Douglas Sharpington, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Henry Sharpies, Liverpool Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Ernest Shaw, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Frank Vincent Shaw, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. George Thomas Shaw, General List
Capt. Robert, Edward Frederic Shaw, London Regiment
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Joseph Patrick Lambert Shea, Durham Light Infantry
Tmp Lt. William Frank Sheather, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Thomas Lilhco Shedden, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. John Sheepshanks, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Herbert Sheffield, Army Service Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Joseph Sheils, Lancashire Fusiliers
Lt. Harry Neal Shelmerdine, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Allen Goodrich Shenstone, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Austin Kirk Shenton, Royal Engineers
Capt. James Ogilvy Shepherd, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Richard Bellamy Sheppard, Welsh Regiment
Tmp Lt. Gordon Shernff, Army Ordnance Depot
Capt. Geoffrey William Sherston, Rifle Brigade
Capt. Charles Frederick Shields, Leicestershire Regiment
Tmp Sergeant Major James Shiels, Cameron Highlanders
Lt. Herbert Shiner, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. George Gordon Shone, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Frederick William Short, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Sidney Sparkling Moverley Sibold, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Frank Pitchford Silvers, South Staffordshire Regiment
Lt. Archibald Guy Simmons, Honourable Artillery Company
Tmp Capt. Leslie Hyland Simmons, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Charles Henville Simonds, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Alfred Simpkins, Royal Fusiliers
C.S. Maj. Robert Henry Simpson, Army Service Corps
Lt. Robert Kennedy Muir Simpson, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Robert Thorburn Simpson, Liverpool Regiment
Tmp Capt. John Sinclair, Royal Engineers
Capt. Oliver Sturdy Sinnatt, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Leslie Henderson Skene MB RAMC
Lt. Arthur Birtlee Slack, 6th Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers, attd. Trench Mortar Battery
Capt. Francis George Lambart Sladen, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Francis Philip Slater, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Reginald Anderson Slater, Royal Irish Regiment
Capt. Sydney Lawrence Slocock FRCVS Royal Army Veterinary Corps
2nd Lt. Johnson Ewart Smart, Manchester Regiment
Capt. Alexander Smith, Royal Horse Artillery
Capt. Allison Eugene Smith, Royal Artillery
2nd Lt. Arthur, Douglas Smith, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Albert Ernest Smith, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Allison Gould Smith, North Lancashire Regiment
Capt. Arthur Macklow Smith, Royal Garrison Artillery, attd. Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Charles Sydney Smith, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Capt. Daniel Rowland Smith, Army Ordnance Depot
Lt. Edward Archibald Smitt, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Edward Montague Smith, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Ewart William Smith, Army Service Corps
Lt. Frank George Smith, Army Service Corps
Lt. Frederick Smith, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Harold-Smith, West Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. Harry Smith, West Riding Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. James Lindsay Salmond Smith, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. John Poole Smith, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Joseph Edward Geoffrey Smith, Somerset Light Infantry
Capt. Richard Albert Bielchan Smith, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Rodenc Franklyn Smith, Shropshire Light Infantry
Lt. Samuel-Haroild Smith, Cheshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Stephen Berthold Smith, Royal Flying Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Stuart Arthur Smith, attd. Trench Mortar Battery
Tmp Lt. Sydney Smith, Royal Engineers
Lt. William George Smith, Field Company, Royal Engineers
Sgt. Major William George Smith, Liverpool Regiment
Tmp Capt. Arthur Ferguson Heyland Smyth, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Edmund Fitzgerald Smyth, Royal Irish Rifles
Q.M. and Temp Honorary Lt. Samuel Snow, Durham Light Infantry
Capt. Arthur Herbert Tennyson, Lord Somers, 1st Life Guards, attd. Yeomanry
Lt. Austin Somervell, West Riding Regiment
Tmp Lt. Alexander Henderson Souitar, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Compton Southgaite, Northumberland Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Frank Soward, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Eric Bourne Bentnick Speed, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Andrew Spence, Royal Scots Fusiliers
Lt. Arthur Morphew Spence, Royal Horse Artillery
Tmp Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Henry Spencer-Smith, Leicestershire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Michael Spencer-Smith, General List (C. C. Heavy Artillery)
Tmp Capt. Arthur Douglas Spooner, Supply Column, Army Service Corps
Capt. Evelyn Charles Sprawson, RAMC
2nd Lt. George Moore Sproule, Army Service Corps
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. James Chambers Sproule, Cheshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. George Bertrand Spry, Royal Fusiliers
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Horace Owen Squire, Leinster Regiment
Tmp Capt. Arthur Percy Havers Squires, Lincolnshire Regiment, Comdg Trench Mortar Battery
C.S. Maj. William Arthur Stace, Royal Sussex Regiment
Capt. Cecil Spurling Staddon, RAMC
Tmp Lt. Ralph Staley, Field Company, Royal Engineers
Lt. Thomas Henry Gilborn Stamper, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Reginald Stanafocth, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Rev. George, Helliwell Crawford Stanley, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. James Reginald Stanser, York & Lancaster Regiment
Tmp Q.M. and Hon. Lt. William Samuel Herl Staple, King's Own Scottish Borderers
Lt. Vincent Francis Stapleton-Bretherton, Field Company, Royal Engineers
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. James Thomas Starkie, RAMC
Capt. Thomas Henry Langdale Stebbing, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Gilbert Coleridge Stedham, Royal Engineers
Lt. Henry Edwin Steer, Shropshire Light Infantry
Capt. Derek Jarrett Steevens, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Charles Gerald Stephens, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry, attd. Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Kenneth Travers Stephen, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Robert Stephenson, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Capt. Frederick Claude Stern, Yeomanry
Lt. Theodore Henry Stern, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Leo Stevem, Special List
Tmp Capt. Leicester Bradney Stevens, Royal Artillery
Tmp Capt. Hubert Craddock Stevenson, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. John Hugh Macdonald Stevenson, Royal Artillery, Mtn. Battery
Tmp Lt. Michael Stevenson, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. John Colin MacDougall Stewart, General List
Tmp Capt. John Hazelton Stewart, Royal Irish Rifles
Tmp 2nd Lt. Robert Montgomery Stewart, King's Own Scottish Borderers and Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Walter Francis Stirling, late Royal Dublin Fusiliers
Capt. Tom Thornley MacGillicuddy Stoker, Royal Munster Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. William Alfred Collis Stone, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Gerald Johnston Lipyeatt Stoney, Worcestershire Regiment
Capt. Charles Ronald Stott, York & Lancaster Regiment, attd. Royal Engineers
Lt. William Stott, East Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Bernard Lewis Strauss, East Kent Regiment
Capt. Cecil John Charles Street, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Charles Norman Lockhart Stronge, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Capt. Humphrey Cecil Travell Stronge, East Kent Regiment, and Nigeria Regiment
2nd Lt. Lewis Robert Stubbs, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. Philip Lange Sugden, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Frederick Summers, Royal Engineers
Capt. Albert James Sutcliffe, Cheshire Regiment
Lt. James Lawrence Cathcart Sutherland, Royal West Kent Regiment
Capt. Francis Henry Sutton, Hussars
2nd Lt. Jack Cyril Sutton, Manchester Regiment
C.S. Maj. William Swam, Royal Engineers
Capt. James Swan MB RAMC
Tmp Lt. Sydney Bartlett Swan, Gloucestershire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Alfred Bertram Swann, Middlesex Regiment
Capt. Alan Cawley Swindells, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. William Swinton, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Stanley William Sykes, Intelligence Corps
Tmp Lt. William Smith Syme, Cheshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Henry John Hugh Symons, RAMC
2nd Lt. Edward Noel Callis Symonds, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Henry Gordon Tabuteau-Herrick, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Gerald Richard Tadman, Spec List
Lt. Osborne George Tancock, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Harold Astley Tapp, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. Percy John Rutty Tapp, Divisional Train, Army Service Corps
Lt. Sydney Ernest Tarrant, Royal Field Artillery, attd. Survey C, Royal Engineers
Capt. Geoffrey Bulmer Tatham, Rifle Brigade
Lt. Norman Leuchars Tatham, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Charles MacGregor Taylor, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Edward Mallalieu Brooke Taylor, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Edward Roland Taylor, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Ewart John Taylor, Gloucestershire Regiment, attd. Welsh Regiment
Tmp Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Frank Taylor, Lincolnshire Regiment
Lt. Frederick John Taylor, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. George Osborne Taylor, General List, attd. Signal Company, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. George Vere Taylor, Rifles Brigade
Capt. Harold Meadows Taylor, Norfolk Regiment and Machine Gun Corps
Q.M.S. James Taylor, Durham Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Henry Augustus Taylor, Royal Fusiliers
Capt. Kenneth Baring Taylor, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Lt. Norman Taylor, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Wilfrid Adams Teakle, Essex Regiment, attd. Rifle Brigade
Tmp Capt. Charles Hugh Tebay, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Claude Enc Tebbitt, Signal Company, Royal Engineers
Capt. Eustace Ernest Vazeille Temperley, Royal Engineers
Lt. Bertram Temple, Gloucestershire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Alfred Alan Thackery, West Yorkshire Regiment, attd. Essex Regiment
Capt. Reginald Sparshatt Thatcher, Somerset Light Infantry
Sgt. Major William Thomas Theobald, Bedfordshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Henry Thirkill, Royal Engineers, attd. Signal Service
Tmp Capt. Kenneth Alfred Thirsk, East Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. George Thorn, Nyasaland Field Force
Tmp Capt. Basil Walter Thomas, Graves Registration Unit
Tmp Lt. John Henry Thomas, Special List
Lt. William Humphrey Thomas, Yeomanry
Capt. Herbert Stanley Thompson, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. James Thompson, Siege Battery, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Bell Langhorn Thompson, Road Construction Company, Royal Engineers
C.S. Maj. John Thomas Thompson, Northumberland Fusiliers
Lt. Leslie Frank Thompson, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. William Harding Thompson, Royal Field Artillery
C.S. Maj. Alex Downie Thomson, Royal Scots
Capt. Edmund John Thomson, Siege Bty, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. James Smith Thomson, Royal Scots
Lt. Robert Thorburn, Indian Army Reserve of Officers, attd. Light Infantry
Lt. Stephen Keith Thorburn, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Frank Oswald Thome, Manchester Regiment
Lt. Philip Howard Thome, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Leslie Thorns, General List
Tmp Capt. Bernard Martin Thornton, Army Ordnance Depot
Tmp Capt. George Lostock Thornton, RAMC
Q.M.S. Samuel West Thornton, Royal Irish Rifles
Capt. William Henry Jelf Thornton, Royal Artillery
2nd Lt. Francis John Mytton Thornycrolt, Manchester Regiment
Tmp Capt. Bertram Leland Thorp, Army Service Corps, and Tank Corps
2nd Lt. George Fleetwood Thunlier, Devonshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Charles Ernest Thurston, Royal Scots 2nd Lt. William Evan Tibbs, Royal Artillery
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Thomas John Tilbrook, RAMC
Capt. John Arthur Stuart Tillard, Royal Engineers
Capt. Justice Crosland Tilly, West Yorkshire Regiment, attd. Tank Corps
2nd Lt. Leonard Arthur Tilney, Royal Horse Guards, and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Capt. Robert Tindall MB RAMC
Lt. George Evelyn Tiriling, East Lancashire Regiment
Rev. George Wolfe Robert Tobias, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
2nd Lt. Herbert Stanley Todd, East Surrey Regiment
Capt. Richard Tomlinson, Army Service Corps
Tmp Lt. Thomas Fowler Tomlinson, Royal Engineers
Lt. Joseph Walter Tompkins, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt. Maynard Tomson, Divisional Signal Company, Royal Engineers
Lt. Kenneth Sanderson Torrance, Manchester Regiment
Tmp Capt. William Frederick Topley, Labour Corps
Lt. Arthur Totton, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Robert Wilfrid Townsend, Devonshire Regiment
Lt. Cecil Edward Joseph Trafford, Scots Guards
Tmp Lt. Gilbert Barsham Traill, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. William Augustus Trasenster, Royal Fusiliers
Capt. Tom Stockham Travere, London Regiment
2nd Lt. Francis Joseph Traylen, Rifle Brigade
2nd Lt. Harry Walter Tredmnick, Yeomanry
2nd Lt. Mansel James Tregurtha, London Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Capt. Rudolph Montague Tren, Army Service Corps
Tmp Lt. Henry Prentis Trend, Connaught Rangers
Capt. Leslie Hamilton Trist, Lincolnshire Regiment, attd. East Lancashire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Alick Dunbar Trotter, South Lancashire Regiment
Lt. Harry William Troupe, Royal Horse Artillery, attd. Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Everard Hugh Trousdale, Army Service Corps
Capt. Alexander James Trousdell, Royal Irish Fusiliers
Lt. Arthur Malcolm Gillett Trotter, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Joseph Ernest Troughton, West Riding Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Robert William Trump, Spec Company, Royal Engineers
Capt. George Arthur Tryon, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Tmp Capt. Spencer Tryon, King's African Rifles
Tmp Capt. James Somerville Turcau, Seaforth Highlanders
Capt. Alan Leonard Smith Tuke MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. Oswald Graham Noel Turnbull, Army Service Corps
Tmp Lt. Arthur Robert Turner, East African Pioneer Company
Tmp Lt. Clifford Grosvenor Turner, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Henry Elliot Turner, Signal Company, Royal Engineers
C.S. Maj. Henry Michael Turner, London Regiment
Lt. Maurice Finnemore Turner, Monmouthshire Regiment
Capt. Montagu Trevor Turner, Royal Sussex Regiment
Lt. Oswald Morris Turner, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Roland Turner, York & Lancaster Regiment
Lt. William Maitland Turner, Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. James Wmford Turrell, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
2nd Lt. Fiank Percival Twine, Royal Sussex Regiment
Capt. The Hon. Ivo Murray Twisleton-Wykeham-Fiennes, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Dudley Cyril Twiss, South Staffordshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Harold William Tyler, Royal Engineers
Rev. Edward Denis Tyndall, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Lt. John Altabon Guise Tyndale, Railway Company, Royal Engineers
Capt. Guy Yelverton Tyrrell, East Kent Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Roland King Uhthoff, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Alfred Edwin Underhay, Royal West Surrey Regiment
Capt. Ian Ure, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Lt. Harry Usher, Royal Scots, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Lt. William Vance, Royal Irish Fusiliers
Capt. Edward Charles Louis van Cutsem, Shropshire Light Infantry
Capt. Stephen Hugh Van Neck, London Regiment
Lt. William John Varley, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Bernard Varvill, RAMC
Tmp Capt. Michael Noel Varvill, Royal Engineers, attd. Railway Corps (Prot)
Capt. Charles Hardy Vaughan, Army Service Corps
Lt. Edward Harold Vaughan, Yeomanry
Capt. Edmund Wayne Vaughan MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. Thomas Hubert Veasey, General List
Capt. Ernest Hardinge Veitch, Durham Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Robert Vernet, General List
Tmp R.S. Maj. Henry Vincent, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Lt. Louis Henry Xavier Vintcent, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Thomas. Aubrey Vise, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Enc William Noel Wade, Hampshire Regiment
Capt. George Albert Wade, South Staffordshire Regiment, attd. MGC
Capt. Richard Harry Wagner, London Regiment, attd. Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Thomas Hinde Wake, Northumberland Fusiliers
Capt. Kenrick Prescot Walker, York & Lancaster Regiment
Tmp Lt. Knuts Waldenstrom, Intelligence Corps
Rev. Samuel Charles Waldegrave, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Lt. Frank Raphael Waley, General List, and Trench Mortar Battery
Tmp Capt. Arthur Francis Gregory Walker, General List
Tmp Lt. Alexander Izat Walker, Divisional Signal Company, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Edwin Harvey Walker, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Joseph Walker MB RAMC
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Willis Walker, Tunnlg Company, Royal Engineers
Lt. Thornton Howard Walker, Royal Field Artillery, Ammunition Column
Capt. Ulnc William Ferrier Walker, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
C.S. Maj. John Wall, Grenadier Guards, attd. Honourable Artillery Company
Tmp Capt. Edward Chapman Wallace, RAMC
Lt. Frederic Campbell Wallace, Royal Irish Rifles, Spec. Reserve
Tmp Lt. John Wallace, Divisional Signals Company, Royal Engineers
Lt. Gerald Edward Henry Waller, Siege Company (R Mon.), Royal Engineers
Capt. Ernest Walling, West Yorkshire Regiment
Lt. Frederick Morfee Walsh, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Ernest John Walthew, Field Company, Royal Engineers
Capt. Frederick Walton, Durham Light Infantry
Capt. Percy Walton, Gordon Highlanders
Lt. Allan Edgar Wand, Leicestershire Regiment
Lt. Alsager Warburton, Liverpool Regiment
Tmp Lt. Charles Wilson Ward, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Joseph Hugh Ward MB RAMC
Capt. John Percival Ward, Field Company, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Orlando Frank Montague Ward, Royal Artillery
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Herbert Ernest Balfern Ware, RAMC
R.S. Maj. William Francis Warren, Royal West Kent Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Charles Warren, Welsh Regiment
Lt. Douglas Charles Warwick, North Staffordshire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Capt. Hugh Fleming Warwick MB RAMC
Capt. Cyril Walter Carleton Wasey, Royal Warwickshire Regiment, attd. Royal Flying Corps
C.S. Maj. Harold George Waters, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Tmp Lt. Charles Tyrrell Watkins, Army Ordnance Depot
Tmp Capt. Gwilym David Watkins DSO RAMC
Tmp 2nd Lt. James William Watkins, Lancashire Fusiliers
Hon. Capt. Stephen Watling, Army Ordnance Depot
Capt. Edward Watson, Highland Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Aubrey Wentworth Harrison Watson, King's Royal Rifle Corps
R.S. Maj. Joseph Watson, Durham Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. James Watson, Army Service Corps
Tmp Capt. John Dalglish Watson, RAMC
2nd Lt. Kenneth Charles Forrester Watson, South Lancashire Regiment, attd. Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Stanley Watson, Cheshire Regiment
Lt. Thomas William Watson, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. William Barrie Watson MB RAMC
2nd Lt. Hugo Burr Craig Watt, Durham Light Infantry
Capt. James Cairnes Watt, East African Medical Service, attd. King's African Rifles
Tmp Capt. Reginald Cuthbert Watts, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Lt. Thomas George Watt, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Hedley George Watts, attd. Liverpool Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Thomas Nathaniel Watts-Watts, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Capt. Herbert Waylen, Wiltshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Henry Buckland Weatherdon, Royal Field Artillery, attd. Labour Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Oliver Stanley Webb, Signal Company, Royal Engineers
Capt. Stuart Napier Charles Webb, South Wales Borderers and Nigeria Regiment
C.S. Maj. William Webb, 2nd Battalion, Suffolk Regiment, attd. Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Geoffrey John Websdale, Signal Company, Royal Engineers
Capt. William Joseph Webster MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. Llewellyn McIntyre Weeks, RAMC
2nd Lt. Wilfrid Clement Septimus Weighill, West Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. George Gordon Weir, Royal Scots
Rev. Frederick William Welbon, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Capt. Lewis Barrington Weldon, Special List
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Allan Welch, West Yorkshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Thomas Ridley Welch, Durham Light Infantry
Tmp Lt. Charles Douglas Wells, Royal Lancaster Regiment
Tmp Lt. Cecil Frank Wells, Royal Fusiliers
Rev. Edward John Welsher, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Capt. Archibald Stewart West, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Harry Gordon West, Liverpool Regiment
Lt. Louis John Westbury, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Robert Burns Wharrie, Highland Light Infantry, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Walter Roland Tracey Whatmore, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Capt. Alexander Hamilton Wheeler, West Somerset Yeomanry
Capt. John Bickersteth Wheeler, Hussars, attd. Signal Service
Tmp Capt. Bertrand Percy Whillis, Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Everard White, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Frank Buller Howard White, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Bernard Burke White, Durham Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. George Plunkett White MB RAMC
C.S. Maj. Percy White, Royal Sussex Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Sidney John White, Spec. Company, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. William Robert White, Royal Irish Rifles
Lt. Edward George Lang Whiteaway, Yorkshire Light Infantry, attd. West Yorkshire Regiment
Lt. Gerald Herbert Penn Whitfield, Royal Irish Rifles
Lt. Philip Geoffrey Whitefoord, Royal Artillery
Lt. Reginald. Henry Hughes Whitehead, Royal Horse Artillery
Lt. Reginald Willoughby Whitehead, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Augustin George Richard Whitehouse, Herefordshire Regiment
Lt. John Francis Martin Whiteley, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Edward Victor Whiteway, East Surrey Regiment
Capt. Ernest James Whiteon, Highland Light Infantry
Lt. Francis Robert Whitten, Field Company, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Percy Henry Roy Whittet, Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Arthur William Whittingham, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Mark Whitwill, Royal Engineers
Capt. Gerald Eden Mynors Whittuck, Somerset Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Percy Whyatt, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Capt. Robert Whyte, London Regiment
Lt. Charles Foster Wicks, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Frederick James Wicks, Royal Garrison Artillery, attd. Army Ordnance Depot
Lt. John Henry Becher Wigginton, Army Service Corps
Capt. Henry Rowe Wight, Border Regiment, attd. Royal Engineers
Lt. Arthur Bennett Wightman, Manchester Regiment
Capt. Lionel St. George Wilkinson, Manchester Regiment
Tmp Capt. William Dugdale Wilkinson, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Basil Henry Williams, Hussars
2nd Lt. Cuthbert Gray Williams, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Edmund Charles Williams, Royal Munster Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Frank Harry Williams, Road Cons Company, Royal Engineers
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. George John Williams, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Hugh Patrick Williams, Army Service Corps
Tmp Lt. Leslie Hamlyn Williams, Army Ordnance Depot
2nd Lt. Nigel Oldham Williams, London Regiment, attd. Kings Royal Rifle Corps
2nd Lt. Richard Williams, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt. Robert Arthur Williams, Army Troops, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Sedley Gerald Williams, General List, Devonshire Regiment, attd. Trench Mortar Battery
Rev. Thomas John Williams, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. William Henry Williams, Army Service Corps
Rev. William James Williams, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. Beetram Clough Williams-Ellis, Welsh Guards, attd. Tank Corps
Capt. Hudleston Noel Hedworth Williamson, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. John Williamson, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Alfred Gordon Wills, Cambridgeshire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Frederick Arthur Neville Wilmott, Royal Berkshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Stanley Birley Wilmot, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Arthur Wilson, Leinster Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Capt. Alan Wilson MB RAMC
Capt. Alexander Frazer Wilson MB RAMC
Lt. George Henry Wilson, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. George Ronald Wilson, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Herbert Wilson, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. William Fothergill Wilson MB RAMC
Lt. Roy Ansted Winder, Middlesex Regiment and Tank Corps
R.S. Maj. Thomas Winderam, Scottish Rifles
Capt. William Palmer Wilton, London Regiment
2nd Lt. William Wilberforce Winkworth, Royal Field Artillery
Sgt. Major John Winmill, Rifle Brigade
Lt. William Meggitt Winter, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. James Percival Winterbotham, Gloucestershire Regiment
Lt. Cuthbert Walter Wise, Army Service Corps and Royal Flying Corps
Lt. George Leslie Keith Wisely, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Charles Watts MB RAMC
2nd Lt. Arthur Charles Wood, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. Arderne Relf Wood, Yeomanry
Tmp Lt. Charles Constable Wood, Royal Irish Rifles
Capt. Frank Wood, Lancashire Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Kenneth Berridge Wood, Leicestershire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Capt. William Vincent Wood, RAMC
Lt. Cyril Frank Woodbridge Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Bond Wilby Woodhouse, Royal Engineers
C.S. Maj. Horace Dawson Woods, Bedforshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Charles Campbell Woolley, South Wales Borderers
Capt. John Sims Woolley, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. William Woolliscroft, Royal Field Artillery, attd. Trench Mortar Battery
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Norman Wootton, attd. Trench Mortar Battery
Lt. Leslie Graham Wormald, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. William Parker Wrathall, Royal Highlanders
Tmp Capt. Clifton Wright, Signal Company, Royal Engineers
Lt. Charles Seymour Wright, Royal Engineers, Signal Company
Capt. Egerton Lowndes Wright, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
C.S. Maj. Harry Joseph Wright, Scots Guards, attd. London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Herbert William Wright, Field Company, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Percy Frederic Wright, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Peter Wright, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Wilfred Wright, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Harold Anthony Saxton Wurtele, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Richard John Penfold Wyatt, General List
Lt. and Temp Capt. David Courtney Wybrants, Army Service Corps Divisional Supply Column
Capt. Charles Edward Fowler Wynooll, Royal Engineers
Lt. Guy Richard Charles Wyndham, King's Royal Rifle Corps
Tmp Lt. Robert Mainwaring Wynne-Eyton, General List and Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Henry George Yates, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. James Yates, Northumberland Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Alec Dawson Young, West Yorkshire Regiment
Lt. James Young, Royal Scots
2nd Lt. Leslie Abraham, Yeomanry
2nd Lt. Johnson Morris Affleck, Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Ian Woodford Aitken, Dragoon Guards
Lt. John Aldam Aizlewood, Dragoon Guards
Lt. William Poyntz Alcock, Hussars
Tmp 2nd Lt. Christopher Rowland Aldereon, Royal Engineers
Sub-Major Amar Sing Thapa, Sardar Bahadur, Indian Army
Capt. William Herbert Wynne Apperley, Royal Sussex Regiment
Tmp Lt. Richard Montgomery Archdale, Hussars
Tmp Lt. Albert Herbert Howard Armstrong, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Arnold Bright Ashford, London Regiment
Lt. Edward Gordon Audland, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Alfred Ernest Bagnall, York & Lancaster Regiment
Capt. The Hon. George Evan Michael Baillie, Royal Horse Artillery
Capt. Sidney Charles Ball, Royal Lancaster Regiment
Rev. Humphrey Gordon Barclay, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Lt. Warren Barclay, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
2nd Lt. David Crawford Gordon Bardsley, South Staffordshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Wilfred Pease Barker, West Yorkshire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Roland Todd Barnard, Dragoon Guards
Tmp Sub Lt. John Cyril Bartholomew, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Lt. Herbert Ralph Barton, Hussars
Lt. Bernard Paul Gascoigne Beanlands, Hampshire Regiment, and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. James Richardson Beckett, North Lancashire Regiment
Lt. Eric Lowthian Bell, Northumberland Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Richard Bell, Border Regiment
Capt. Augustus Charles Herbert Benke, London Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Richard Reed Bentley, General List and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Robert Humphrey Binney, Essex Regiment Spec. Reserve
Lt. Duncan Blackwell, London Regiment
2nd Lt. Henry Claude Allan Blanchard, London Regiment
2nd Lt. David Blair, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Stanley George Blake, Gloucestershire Regiment, attd. Devonshire Regiment
Lt. Cecil Francis Ramsden Bland, Royal Berkshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Reginald Percy Bloor, Royal Field Artillery, attd. Trench Mortar Battery
Lt. Douglas Maryon Bluett, Honourable Artillery Company
Tmp 2nd Lt. Sidney. Blyth, Royal Scots
2nd Lt. Edward Henry Brooke Boulton, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Herbert Booth, London Regiment
2nd Lt. James Duncan Boyd, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. William Boyd, Royal Field Artillery, attd. Royal Engineers
Capt. Allen Basil Bratton, North Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Sub Lt. Joe Willis Brearley, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Capt. George AlbertBrett, London Regiment
Lt. Francis James Bridges, Hussars, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Capt. John Frederick Broughton MB RAMC
Lt. Bernard Loftus Brown, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. John Bruce, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Harry Buckley, Manchester Regiment
Capt. George Talbot Burney, Gordon Highlanders
2nd Lt. John Alexander Burton, Northumberland Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Leslie Frederick Burton, South Staffordshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Alfred Trego Butler, Worcestershire Regiment
2nd Lt. Arnold Hewitt Butterworth, Welsh Regiment
Tmp Capt. Hugh Vyvian Edward Byrne, Norfolk Regiment
2nd Lt. John Stewart Calder, London Regiment
Capt. Angus Cameron MB RAMC
Lt. John Archibald Cameron, Yeomanry, attd. Cameron Highlanders
Tmp Lt. William Kealty Campbell DSO MB RAMC
Tmp Lt. Percy Theodore Carden, General List, and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. George Thomas Carpenter, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. John William Carr, London Regiment
Lt. Arthur Hamilton Carter, Royal Lancaster Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. George Sidney Carter, East Surrey Regiment
Capt. Charles Denny Carus-Wilson, Yeomanry
2nd Lt. Roger Philip Castle, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. Bernard Catling, Royal Field Artillery Spec. Reserve
Tmp Capt. Charles Launder Chalk, RAMC
Lt. Reginald M. Charley, Royal Flying Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Harold Smith Christian, Royal Engineers
Lt. Cyril William Clarke, Liverpool Regiment
2nd Lt. Frederick Laurence Clarke, London Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Geoffrey Read Garnett Clarke, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Sub Lt. William Herbert Clarkson, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Lt. John Scott Cockburn, Hussars
Tmp 2nd Lt. Arthur Hubert Cole, Royal Sussex Regiment
Capt. William Philip Coifox, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Philip Hugh Lumsdeh Campbell Colquhoun, Royal Highlanders
Lt. Herbert Chichester Cory, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Arthur Gilmour Cowling, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Charles Richard Cowper, East Surrey Regiment
Tmp Lt. Robert Frank Craighead, Army Ordnance Depot
Capt. William Nixon Craigs, Northumberland Fusiliers
Capt. Joseph Wilfrid Craven, RAMC
Tmp 2nd Lt. Thomas Edward Chapman Crosbie, Royal Irish Fusiliers
Capt. Cyril Crossley, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Octavious Sydney Darby-Griffiths, North Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Howard Howells Davenport, South Wales Borderers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Charles Davidson, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Douglas Card Davis, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Frederick Albert Dawson, East Surrey Regiment
Lt. Bernard Lorenzo de Robeck, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Charles Vogan Dipnall, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Myles Dixon, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Charles Alban William Duffield, Royal West Kent Regiment
Tmp Capt. Henzell Howard Dummere, RAMC
2nd Lt. Hubert William Durlacher, London Regiment
Capt. Frederick Norman Eastwood, London Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Leslie Edwards, Middlesex Regiment, attd. North Lancashire Regiment
2nd Lt. Herbert Pearce Ellis, Yeomanry
Tmp Sub Lt. Edgar Archibald Elson, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Tmp 2nd Lt. Leonard Llewellyn Evans, attd. Devonshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Allan Cameron Fairbrother, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Tmp Sub-Lt. Kenneth Ian Macdonald Fegan, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
2nd Lt. Cecil Gordon Fenton, Royal Flying Corps
Capt. Stuart Frederick Maxwell Ferguson, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. James Edward McCormick Fetherstonhaugh, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. George de Cardonne Elmsall Findlay, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Fitzgerald, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. John Hinton Fletcher, Royal Engineers
Lt. Thomas Forster, Royal Engineers
Capt. Archibald Francis Freeman, Yeomanry, attd. Royal Welsh Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Frederick Walter Fry, Worcestershire Regiment
Lt. Joseph Charles Gain, London Regiment
Lt. Wilfred Errol Gane, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Noel Garnett-Clarke, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Edward John Langford Garstin, Middlesex Regiment
2nd Lt. Lionel Ghasemore Gates, London Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. George Pindon Geen, Royal Engineers
Lt. Harry Taylor Genet, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Terence Genney, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Frederick Charles Gillard, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Tmp Lt. Geoffrey Ramsay Goldinghain, Royal Marine Light Infantry, attd. Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Edward Guy Medlicott Goodwin, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. Frank Fleming Gow, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Percy Grange, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Robert Johnson Grant, Durham Light Infantry
2nd Lt. James Gray, Cameron Highlanders, attd. Royal Highlanders
Capt. Douglas Green, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Ernest Arthur Gregory, Leicestershire Regiment
2nd Lt. John Vescy Gregory, Northumberland Fusiliers
Lt. Charles Lawrence Greig, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. David George Griffiths, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Benjamin Ernest Gunns, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Walter Pank Hack, Lincolnshire Regiment
Lt. Walter Churchill Hale, Royal Field Artillery
Hon. Lt. Johann Daniel Hamman, Intelligence Department
2nd Lt. Henry Hammond, Dorsetshire Regiment and Royal Flying Corps
Rev. Latimer Pollard Hardaker, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. William Birrell Hardie, Royal Field Artillery
Rev. Wilfrid John Harding, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. Reginald Bargreaves, South Lancashire Regiment
2nd Lt. Reginald Kirman Harper, Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Frank Eric Harrison, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Alexander Ashworth Haworth, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Frank Beckett Hayes, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Cyril George Hein, Loyal North Lancashire Regiment
Lt. Harald Hewett, Royal Berkshire Regiment and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Norman Dudley John Hight, Essex Regiment
2nd Lt. Frederick William Pear Hodges, East Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Eric O'Neil Hogben, Army Cyclist Corps
Lt. Frank Haddon Holmes, Royal Engineers, and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Norman Hope, General List
Lt. Arthur Henry Howard, Yeomanry, attd. West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Harry Howard, attd. Northumberland Fusiliers and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Richard David Howell, Welsh Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Frank Hoyle, South Staffordshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Wilfred Hubball, North Staffordshire Regiment
Lt. Frederick Peter Hughes, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd, Lt. William Hughes, Bedfordshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Albert Edward Thomas Hunt, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Charles Baddon Spurgeon Hunter, Cameron Highlanders
Lt. George Robertson Hunter, Cameron Highlanders, attd. Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. James Lionel Hutchison, London Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Henry Irwin, Liverpool Regiment
Lt. Henry James Ivens, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Frederick Stephens Jasper, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Vivian Henry Jenkin, East Yorkshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Thomas Stephen Jenkins, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Thomas Banks Jenkinson, Cavalry, attd. Lancers
2nd Lt. Edwin Cyril Jervis, West Riding Regiment
2nd Lt. William James Johnston, Cameron Highlanders
Rev. William Alcuin Jones, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
2nd Lt. James Jordan, Dragoon Guards
Capt. William Joynson, Hussars
2nd Lt. Lionel Evelyn Graham Judge, North Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Kekhasru Sobraji Master MB Indian Medical Service
Lt. Lindsay Patrick Grellan Kelly, Lancers
Tmp Capt. Percy Hubert Keys, Royal Engineers
Lt. Walter Hayton Kirkconel, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Geoffrey Knowles, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. George William Koplick, East Yorkshire Regiment, attd. Medium Trench Mortar Battery
Lt. Conrad T. Lally, Royal Flying Corps
Capt. Charles Willington Tremaine Lane, Dragoon Guards
2nd Lt. Frederick Joseph Larkin, London Regiment
2nd Lt. Herbert Russell Latimer, Royal Field Artillery, attd. Trench Mortar Battery
Capt. Vincent Augustus Lawrence, North Lancashire Regiment
2nd Lt. Reginald John Wilson Ledingham, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Thomas Lever, Liverpool Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. George Henry Lewis, Northumberland Fusiliers
Lt. Henry Watson Lindsley, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. John Tryweryn Lloyd MB RAMC
2nd Lt. John Local, East Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. Rupert Gordon Lockner, South Wales Borderers
Lt. Richard Cyril Longley, London Regiment
Capt. William Poulett Lousada, Norfolk Regiment
Capt. Archibald Moir Park Lyle, Yeomanry, attd. Royal Highlanders
Lt. Percy Hugh Beverley Lyon, Durham Light Infantry
Lt. John Michael Lyons, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Richard Clarke Lyons, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Donald Murray Macfarlane, Lancashire Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. James MacGregor MD RAMC
Lt. Kenneth John Macintosh, attd. Indian Army
Lt. Robert Maclntyre, Yeomanry, attd. Cameron Highlanders
2nd Lt. Hugh Peter Mackay, Seaforth Highlanders
Tmp Capt. James Murdoch MacKay MB RAMC
Lt. Robert Bruce Darrell MacLeod, Cameron Highlanders
Lt. Harry Dunbar Maconochie, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Phillip Mallett, Gloucestershire Regiment
Lt. Arthur Mann, Army Service Corps and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Thomas Manning, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Capt. David Matthew MB RAMC
Lt. Frederick William Broadbent Maufe, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Walter James Manley, South Wales Borderers
Lt. Lionel Frederick Marson, Dragoon Guards
Tmp 2nd Lt. Gerald William Massey, South Wales Borderers
2nd Lt. Sydney Herbert Matthews, Yeomanry
Rev. Hugh McCalman, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Capt. Alfred James Angel McCabe-Dallas, RAMC
2nd Lt. John Rankin McIlroy, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Lt. James Reston McLeod, Royal Engineers
Capt. Philip McRitchie, RAMC
Lt. Charles Edward Hastings Medhurst, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers, and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Wilfrid Law Mellor, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. John Homer Miller, Manchester Regiment
2nd Lt. Francis Sydney Milligan, Liverpool Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Harry Mills, Royal Field Artillery, attd. Medium Trench Mortar Battery
2nd Lt. Norman Crompton Mitchell, North Lancashire Regiment
Lt. Charles Raymond Mobberley, London Regiment
Lt. Benjamin Mollett, West Riding Regiment
2nd Lt. Peter Joseph Moloney, Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Lt. Frewen Moor, Royal Berkshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. William Shorland Mosse, Royal West Surrey Regiment
2nd Lt. Harold Alexander Mossnian, Royal Berkshire Regiment
Lt. Geoffrey Gore Moule, Hussars
Tmp 2nd Lt. Vivian Falconer Murdoch, Gordon Highlanders
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Joseph Murphy, Royal Irish Fusiliers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Cecil Frederick Nathan, General List and R.F.C
Tmp Lt. Robert Alexander Nicholl, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Robert Rundle Nicol, attd. Essex Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Louis Carverhill Nockels, North Lancashire Regiment
Lt. Dudley William John North, Hussars
Tmp 2nd Lt. Charles William Nott, South Wales Borderers
2nd Lt. Alphoeus Frederick Nye, Gordon Highlanders
Tmp Capt. Arthur David Openshaw, Essex Regiment
Lt. Arthur Walter Osborn, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Ernest Trafford Owles, Royal Irish Fusiliers, and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Lt. Cyril Joseph Oake, East Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. Gerard Edward Palmer, London Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Leonard Oscar Parkes, Royal West Surrey Regiment
Lt. William Grindlay Paterson, Yeomanry, attd. Cameron Highlanders
Tmp Lt. Napier Edward Lewis Pearse, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Arthur Hicks Peck, General List and Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Leonard Jasper Peck, Indian Army Reserve of Officers attd. Indian Army
2nd Lt. Francis Grove Peddle, Northumberland Fusiliers
Capt. Edgar Percival DSO MB RAMC
Tmp 2nd Lt. Reginald Thomas George Perkins, Army Service Corps
Tmp Sub-Lt. Arthur Morson Perry, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
2nd Lt. Walter Ernest Phillips, London Regiment
Lt. Charles Henry Pillman, Cavalry, attd. Dragoon Guards
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Pithouse, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Frank Godwin Free Flatten, attd. Norfolk Regiment
2nd Lt. Hubert Christopher Barker Plummer, Durham Light Infantry
Tmp Lt. Henry Pollitt, Lancashire Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. George Alexander Porterfield, Worcestershire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Reginald Poole Pridham, Devonshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Charles Vernon Powell, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Maurice Aloysius Power MB RAMC
Lt. Sylvester Lindsay Quine, Cheshire Regiment and Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Cyril George Radford, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Reginald Thompson Raine, RAMC
Lt. Eustratio Lucas Ralli, Royal Field Artillery
Rev. John Edward Reilly, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Lt. James Renwick, Royal Engineers
Capt. Gerald Nairne Reynolds, Lancers
2nd Lt. Thomas William Richardson, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Robert Riddel, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
2nd Lt. George Thomas Roberts, London Regiment
Tmp Sub-Lt. Norman Roberts, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Roberts, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Capt. Christopher Rogers MB RAMC
Capt. John Gray Ronaldson MB RAMC
Rev. Canon Arthur Edwin Ross, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. Hugo Donald Ross, Cameron Highlanders
2nd Lt. Evan William Rowlands, Durham Light Infantry
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Francis Russell, Leinster Regiment
2nd Lt. George Sheavyn Sale, Hussars
Tmp Capt. Lewis Gordon Sandford, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. William Mollison Sangster, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Kenneth Gerald Sclanders, General List and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Charles Hubert Scott, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. William Gunn Scott, Yeomanry, attd. Royal Highlanders
2nd Lt. William Scott-Moncrieff, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Thomas Willock Scroggie, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Thomas Richard Barter Seigne, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Donald Humphrey Sessions, General List and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Samuel Brian Shannon, London Regiment
2nd Lt. Frank Alan Sheen, Royal Engineers
Lt. Joseph Ashworth Shepherd, North Lancashire Regiment, attd. London Regiment
2nd Lt. William Simpson, Lincolnshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Harold Vincent Sims, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. William Skeat, Essex Regiment
Lt. Howard Strong Smallman, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Neville George Smith, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Edward Coultrnan Snape, Royal Field Artillery, attd. Trench Mortar Battery
Tmp Lt. Jerrold Bernard Solomon, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Ralph Alfred Erskine Somerville, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Leon Joseph Gustave Souchon, Hussars
2nd Lt. Herbert Sparling, West Riding Regiment
2nd Lt. Arthur Spencer, London Regiment
Capt. John Blanchard Springman, Yeomanry, attd. Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Capt. Wintringham Norton Stable, Yeomanry, attd. Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Tmp 2nd Lt. George Stevens, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Charles Douglas Storrs, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Thomas William Tyler Street, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Gilbert Arthur Streeter, Royal West Surrey Regiment
2nd Lt. Albert Henry Streets, London Regiment
Tmp Lt. Maurice Strode, Royal West Surrey Regiment
2nd Lt. Thomas Studley, Royal Highlanders
2nd Lt. Glanville Syme, Seaforth Highlanders
Tmp 2nd Lt. James McEwen Thomson Taylor, Cameron Highlanders
Capt. Philip Herbert Teesdale, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Charley Tennison, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Alan Raymond Tetlow, Liverpool Regiment
2nd Lt. John Franklin Thomasson, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Taylor Thompson, Royal Engineers
Lt. Thomas Alexander Lacy Thompson, Northumberland Fusiliers
Lt. Stanley James Till, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. William Harry Topliss-Green, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Reginald Herman Tribe, RAMC
Capt. Charles William Rowland Tuke, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Alfred John Tyler, General List and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Cyril Thomas Underhay, London Regiment
Lt. John Lyne Vachell, Royal Field Artillery, attd. Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Capt. Henry Bernard van Praagh, Royal Marine Light Infantry
2nd Lt. Arthur Egbert Vautier, Royal Field Artillery, attd. Trench Mortar Battery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Frank Walker, East Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. James Robinson Walker, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Matthew Henry Walker, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Roger Beverley Walker, Yeomanry
2nd Lt. Charles Henry Wallington, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Tmp Lt. Cyril Michael Chavannes Ward, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Frank Denis Warren, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Charles Louis Waters, Royal Berkshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Percy Frederick Watts, Bedfordshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Harold Webb, attd. Manchester Regiment
Tmp Capt. John Webster, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Walter Kenneth Hutchison Welbourne, Royal Horse Artillery
Tmp Lt. Charles Weld, Leinster Regiment
2nd Lt. John Wellbelove, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Sub-Lt. William Wellwood, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve Regiment
Tmp Lt. John William Kinch Wernham, Royal Berkshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Thomas Westby, Royal Marine Light Infantry, attd. Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Ralph Archibald White, Northumberland Fusiliers
Lt. Robert Percy Frith White, Royal Lancaster Regiment
Lt. Charles James Mackie Whittaker, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. f. Raynsford Leopold Wemyss Whittaker, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Ralph Piggott Whittington-Ince, East Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. Humphrey Wolsey Wrightwick, London Regiment, attd. Tank Corps
2nd Lt. Leslie Barnard Williams, General List and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Corbett Williamson, Royal Marine Light Infantry
Tmp Lt. Edwin Ernest Wilson, King's African Rifles
Rev. Bertram Wolferstan, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. John Herbert Greenwood Womersley, Royal Garrison Artillery and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Sydney George Wood, Northumberland Fusiliers, attd. Royal Engineers
Capt. John Francis Wortley, York & Lancaster Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Albert Edmund Wright, South Staffordshire Regiment
Hon. Lt. and Riding Master Arthur Ernest Wright, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Samuel Pearson Yates, Hussars
C.S. Maj. Alfred Edward Edwards, North Lancashire Regiment
C.S. Maj. John Love, London Regiment
C.S. Maj. Charles MacDonald, Manchester Regiment
C.S. Maj. James William Whiteside, Liverpool Regiment
Lt. Herbert Mayon Adams, Worcestershire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Peter Adamson, North Lancashire Regiment
Lt. Norman Greathed Alexander Alexander, Grenadier Guards
2nd Lt. Edward Bruce Allan, Lancashire Fusiliers
Capt. Charles Royle Allen, Manchester Regiment
Lt. Abraham Clifford Altham, Lancashire Fusiliers
Lt. Douglas John Amery-Parkes, Middlesex Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Lt. Charles Archer, attd. West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Leslie Vernon Ardagh, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Archibald Theodore Arrol
Tmp Lt. Francis Douglas Arundell, British South Africa Police
Capt. Robert Vacy Clifford Ash, RAMC
2nd Lt. Laurence Ashling, Hampshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Pennington Ashton, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. John Augustus Samuel Aylward, Yeomanry
2nd Lt. Arthur Babbage, Gloucestershire Regiment
2nd Lt. Evan Murray Macgregor Balfour, Scots Guards
2nd Lt. William Treanor Ball, Liverpool Regiment
Lt. Wilfrid Barnard, King's Own Scottish Borderers
Capt. John Canning Lethbridge Barnett, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry, and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Crocker Edmund Barrington, Royal Field Artillery, and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Robert Scott Barrowman, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Basil Dixon Bate, General List attd. Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Lt. Ernest Montague Bates, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. John Bateson, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Baxendale, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. George-Beaumont, East Surrey Regiment
Tmp Lt. Nathaniel Harry Beedham, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Lt. Richard George Garfield Beesley, Norfolk Regiment
Lt. George Clarence Beetham, York & Lancaster Regiment
Capt. Karl Vere Barker-Benfield DSO Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Gorton Vaughan Bernays, West Riding Regiment
Capt. Arthur Joseph Beveridge MB RAMC
Capt. Henry Anthony Birkbeck, Yeomanry
Lt. Douglas Black, West Riding Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. James McKinlay Black, Highland Light Infantry
Capt. John Holiday Blackburn MB RAMC
2nd Lt. Alec Stuart Blacklaws, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. William Norman Bladen, North Staffordshire Regiment
Capt. Thomas Reginald Blain, Royal Lancaster Regiment
Lt. William Robert Blair, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Lt. Harold Ernest Blunt, Yeomanry
Lt. John Boden Boden, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Eyton FitzGerald Bond, Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. Geoffrey Lezaire Bonsor, West Yorkshire Regiment
2nd Lt. William Harrison Bordass, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Thomas James Bolle Bosvile, Rifle Brigade
Tmp Lt. Robert Matthew Boyle, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Capt. Norman Napier Evelyn Bray, Indian Cavalry
2ad Lt. James Brockman, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Cecil Bernard Brooke, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Lt. Ralph Seath Stark Brown, General List, and Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Oliver Campbell Bryson, Yeomanry, and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Lt. James William Buckley, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Paul Ward Spencer Bulman, General List, and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Alfred Haunsell Burman, Rifle Brigade, Spec. Reserve
Tmp Lt. Alexander Brown Burton, Highland Light Infantry
2nd Lt. John Lewen Byrne, Seaforth Highlanders
2nd Lt. David Dandie Cairnie, Seaforth Highlanders
Lt. Donald Campbell, Seaforth Highlanders
Capt. Donald Swinton Campbell, Yeomanry
Lt. Sir William Andrews Ava Campbell Bt Yeomanry
Lt. Alexander James Walker Carnie, Gordon Highlanders
2nd Lt. William Alexander Christie Carr, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Frederick William Arthur Carter, Shropshire Light Infantry
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Cassidy, attd. Lancashire Fusiliers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Clifford Worthley Caswell, Middlesex Regiment
Lt. Michael Chapman, Grenadier Guards
2nd Lt. Thomas Chapman, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Lt. Albany Kenneth Charlesworth, Dragoon Guards
Lt. Robert Leslie Chidlaw-Roberts, Hampshire Regiment, and Royal Flying Corps
Lt. James Martin Child, Manchester Regiment, and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Leslie Howard Chivers, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Charles Lawrence Clarson, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Harry Cleal, Essex Regiment
2nd Lt. Harold Gardiner Cobon, Yeomanry
Tmp 2nd Lt. Frank Cocker, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Tmp Lt. Harry Ronald Collier, King's Own Scottish Borderers
Lt. Arthur Edgar Gerald Collins, Royal Engineers
Capt. Dennis Comins, Royal Engineers
Lt. Edmund Samuel Winter Cooke, South Wales Borderers
2nd Lt. John Henry Cooper, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Capt. Joseph Victor, Cope MB RAMC
Tmp 2nd Lt. Thomas Charles Cooper, Royal Lancaster Regiment
Lt. Henry Frank Cornick, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Cowherd, Worcestershire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Thomas William Cox, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Robert Miles Crabtree, West Yorkshire Regiment
Lt. Edward Archibald Crane, Royal Engineers
Rev. Kenneth Northcote Crisford, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
2nd Lt. Charles Henry Crouch, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Ison Cuffley, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. James Cuthbert, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Lt. Charles Harry Rutherford Dain, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Richard Edward Darnley, Army Service Corps
Capt. Charles O'Brien Daunt, Indian Cavalry
Capt. Evan John Carne David, Yeomanry
Tmp 2nd Lt. James Douglas Davidson, attd. Rifle Brigade
Tmp 2nd Lt. David Morris Davies, attd. Welsh Regiment
2nd Lt. Thomas Talvin Davies, Welsh Regiment
2nd Lt. William Herbert Davies, Durham Light Infantry
Tmp 2nd Lt. James Ernest Davis, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Joseph Frederick Davis, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Walter Ernest Davis, Gloucestershire Regiment, and Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Frank Henry Dear, Royal Sussex Regiment, and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Thomas William Deeves, Middlesex Regiment
Lt. Henry Eustace Bligh de Gruchy, Shropshire Light Infantry
Lt. Louis Anthony de Jongh, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. William George Denereaz, Border Regiment
Tmp Capt. Charles Beauclerk Despard, Dragoons
Lt. Joseph Charles Brendin Devoy, Royal Dublin Fusiliers
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. James Dicks, Highland Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. David McMurray Dickson, RAMC
Lt. George Leishman Dickson, Highland Light Infantry
Lt. George Eric Attwood Disturnal, Royal Engineers
Lt. George Humphrey Stansfield Dixon, Royal Horse Artillery
2nd Lt. Priestly Donne, West Yorkshire Regiment
2nd Lt. William Charles Henry Dore, L.C.
2nd Lt. Thomas Crook Duckworth DCM Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Lt. Joseph Hume Dudgeon, Dragoons
Lt. Ian Archibald James Duff, Dorsetshire Regiment, and Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Edmund Lloyd Hain Dunkerton, York & Lancaster Regiment
Lt. S. Dutt, Indian Medical Service
Tmp 2nd Lt. Frank Eames, South Wales Borderers
Lt. Albert Ewan Earle, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Lt. Frederick Francis Edbrooke, Yeomanry
Tmp Lt. John Edmunds Edwards, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. William Ace Edwards, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Lt. Arthur Winterbottom Elliott, Bedfordshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Albert Ellwood, Royal Lancaster Regiment
2nd Lt. Arthur Bertram Entwistle, Leicestershire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Christmas Richard Evans, Welsh Regiment
2nd Lt. John Henry Evans, Royal Lancaster Regiment
Lt. William Alfred Everitt, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
2nd Lt. Arthur Everton, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Lt. Harold Cecil Eves, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Douglas Falconer, Gordon Highlanders
Tmp 2nd Lt. Sydney Ernest Farbon, attd. Northamptonshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Edward Fawcett, Durham Light Infantry
Capt. George Fenwick-Owen, Yeomanry
Capt. Fritz Eberhard Ferguson, West Yorkshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Robert Leighton Moore Ferrie, Royal Flying Corps
Capt. John Douglas Fiddes, RAMC
2nd Lt. Frank William Fielding, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Lt. George Sidney Fillingham, Durham Light Infantry
2nd Lt. Philip Gerard Finch, Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Finney, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Lt. Richard Helden Forster, Middlesex Regiment
Lt. George Flett, Seaforth Highlanders
Tmp 2nd Lt. Hubert Charles Franklin, Royal Dublin Fusiliers
2nd Lt. John Courtney Fraser, Grenadier Guards, attd. Machine Gun Guards
Capt. John Henry Pearson Fraser MB RAMC
Tmp 2nd Lt. Ernest Howard Freer, Royal Engineers
Tmp Lt. Francis Aylmer Frost, Cavalry
Capt. Joseph Lawrence Fry, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Percy Claude Furlong, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Philip Jacob Gaffiin MB RAMC
Tmp 2nd Lt. Henry John Gale MM Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. David Menmuir Gall, Scottish Rifles
Tmp Capt. Hugh Bernard German, RAMC
Tmp Lt. Arthur Harry Ashfield Giles, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Lt. Edward Giles, King's Own Scottish Borderers Spec. Reserve
Tmp Capt. Francis Joseph Glynn, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Frederick William Goddard, Essex Regiment
2nd Lt. Archibald Gordon, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. James Hall McIntosh Gordon, Gordon Highlanders
Tmp Lt. Kenneth Gordon, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Herbert Victor Gould, Seaforth Highlanders
2nd Lt. John Kenneth Leslie Graham, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Lancelot Cecil Torbock Graham, Indian Cavalry
2nd Lt. Henry Herbert Brett Grain, Cambridgeshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Frank Arthur Grange MB RAMC
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Alwyne Graves, attd. Lincolnshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Edwin Allan Thomas Green, RAMC
2nd Lt. Alexander Anton Gunn, Seaforth Highlanders
Lt. Reginald Hale-White, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Augustus Henry Hall, Royal Irish Rifles
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Hall, Worcestershire Regiment
2nd Lt. Alexander Hunter Halliday, York & Lancaster Regiment
Tmp Lt. Arthur Collis Hallowes MB RAMC
Tmp Lt. Prank George Hamilton, Royal Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Cyril Elmore Hammond, Irish Guards
2nd Lt. Herbert Hardaker, West Riding Regiment
Capt. Henry Norman Harding, Yeomanry
Lt. The Hon. Alexander Henry Louis Hardinge, Grenadier Guards
Lt. Archibald Percy Harris, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Ernest Edward Harris, Gloucestershire Regiment
Lt. Eric William Harris, West Riding Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Nathan Leonard Harris, attd. Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Lt. Stanley Dickinson Harrison, Lancashire Fusiliers
Lt. Stewart Sandbach Harrison, Irish Guards, attd. Machine Gun Guards
Capt. Henry John Harvey, King's Own Scottish Borderers
Lt. Marcus Goodbody Haughton, Yeomanry
Tmp 2nd Lt. Albert Hawkes, Bedfordshire Regiment
Lt. Thomas Hawkins, Yeomanry
2nd Lt. Percival Hay, Welsh Regiment
Lt. Sidney Pascoe Hayward, West Riding Regiment
Lt. Arthur William Haywood, Gloucestershire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Gregory Ignatius George Michael Thomas Head, Suffolk Regiment
Lt. Albert Victor Heal, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Thomas Healey, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Tmp 2nd Lt. George Godfrey Heathcock, Royal Engineers
Lt. John Hector, Gordon Highlanders
Lt. Cuthbert Charles Hedges, Royal Berkshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Gordon Henderson, Middlesex Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Paul Matthew Heptinstall, Royal Engineers
Lt. Nathaniel Hess, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Austen Heyes, attd. Liverpool Regiment
Tmp Capt. Charles Frederick Highett, Royal Engineers
Lt. John James Hill, York & Lancaster Regiment
2nd Lt. Samuel Frederick Hill, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Thomas Ide Hill, Essex Regiment
2nd Lt. Francis Percy Hodge, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Charles Frederick Griffith Hollis, East Kent Regiment
2nd Lt. Robert Christmas Hollis, Lancers, and Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Lt. James Reginald Hucker, East Surrey Regiment
Lt. Charles Kerielm Hulbert, Wiltshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Charles Ibbott, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Lt. Cecil Eustace Irby, Grenadier Guards
2nd Lt. Harry Irish, West Yorkshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Joseph Henry Irons, West Riding Regiment
2nd Lt. Arthur Stanley Jack, West Riding Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Stewart Spiers Jackson, Worcestershire Regiment
Lt. William Jaffrey, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Tmp Lt. Paul Theodore James, Army Service Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. James Jenkins, Northumberland Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Louis Augustus Fram Jeppe, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Roger Bridge Johnson, Hussars
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Walter Johnston, attd. Border Regiment
Lt. William Jeffray Johnstone, Yeomanry
Lt. George Basil Harris Jones, Yeomanry
Tmp Capt. James Phillips Jones, RAMC
2nd Lt. Kenneth Leslie Jones, Welsh Regiment
Tmp Capt. Frederick Bennett Julian MB RAMC
2nd Lt. Douglas Gordon Kemp, Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Robert Nathaniel Kennedy, Royal Irish Rifles
Tmp 2nd Lt. Lawrence Kimberley, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Capt. George Geoffrey Kinder, West Yorkshire Regiment
2nd Lt. William Donald King, Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Edward Kinkead, Bedfordshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Albert Marlow Kinnear, General List, and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Alfred Ovenden Knight, North Lancashire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Arthur Arnold Kirkham, attd. Middlesex Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Hubert Knight, West Yorkshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Leonard Harry Knowles, Suffolk Regiment
2nd Lt. Willie Knowles, West Riding Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Robert Kyle Knox, Royal Irish Rifles
Tmp 2nd Lt. Edward Dion Lane, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Hardinge Lathom-Browne, Royal Fusiliers
Lt. Raymond Duff Lawford, Grenadier Guards
Lt. Percy Hastings Leach, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Francis John Lear, Royal Horse Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Arthur Stanley Lee, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment and Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Esm Gordon Linton, King Edward's Horse
Tmp Lt. Albert Peregrine Lloyd, Welsh Regiment
Lt. John Charles Lloyd, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Walter Edward Lovejoy, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
2nd Lt. John Lunn, Worcestershire Regiment
2nd Lt. Francis Murray Bernard Lutyens, Coldstream Guards
2nd Lt. Robert George Macadam, Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. Malcolm Macfarlane, Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Arthur Griffiths Maitland-Jones, RAMC
Lt. John Mackenzie, Seaforth Highlanders
Lt. William Wyllie MacNaught MB RAMC
2nd Lt. Charles Mactaggart, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Capt. Manliffe Unsworth Manly, Border Regiment
Rev. Charles Campbell Manning, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp Capt. James Manuel MB RAMC
Lt. John Marshall MB RAMC
Lt. William Edward Albert Masters, Royal Engineers
Lt. Ronald Frank Strickland Mauduit, Dragoon Guards and Royal Flying Corps
Capt. Aymer Douglas Maxwell, Royal Scots
Lt. Herbert Richard Dudfield May, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Reginald Walter May, Welsh Regiment
Tmp Capt. Duncan John McAfee MD RAMC
Lt. James Russell Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Frederick Buick McCarter MB RAMC
Lt. Conolly John Hillhouse McCausland, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Tmp 2nd Lt. James McFarlane, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Maurice Anderdon McFerran, Royal Irish Rifles
Lt. James Gordon McIntyre, Yeomanry
Lt. John Patrick McKemzie, attd. Royal Engineers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Thomas McKnight, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Lt. Guy Wilkinson Meats, West Yorkshire Regiment, Spec
2nd Lt. Frederick William Meston, Gordon Highlanders
2nd Lt. Harry Metcalfe, West Riding Regiment
2nd Lt. Leonard John Miles, Essex Regiment
Capt. Owen Miles, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Ernest Leonard Mills, London Regiment
Tmp Lt. George Henry Mills, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. William Watt Milne, Middlesex Regiment
Lt. George Esmond Milward, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Allan Mitchell, York & Lancaster Regiment
Lt. Eric Sydney Mitchell, Worcestershire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. James Mitchell, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Capt. Alaric Rimington Moncrieff, Dragoons
Tmp Capt. James Allen Montgomery MD RAMC
2nd Lt. Donald Arthur Birbeck Moodie, Irish Guards
2nd Lt. John Moor, West Yorkshire Regiment
2nd Lt. James Alexander Moreland, Royal Irish Rifles
Rev. Abraham Rees Morgan, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. David Floyd Popkin Morgan, Yeomanry
2nd Lt. Arthur Henry Morris, Middlesex Regiment
Temp2nd Lt. Edward Morris, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Capt. George Morris MB RAMC
2nd Lt. John Frederick Morrison, Lancashire Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. David Assur Henry Moses, RAMC
Lt. Edward James Moss, Yeomanry
Lt. Cecil Eric Moy, London Regiment
Capt. James Belling Mudge, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Risaldar Mukand Singh Bahadur, Indian Cavalry
2nd Lt. Arthur Ernest Mulholland, Royal Horse Artillery
2nd Lt. William Thomas John Munday, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. James Hendrie Munro, Seaforth Highlanders
2nd Lt. Martin, Munro, York & Lancaster Regiment
Lt. John Neil, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, attd. Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Alexander Millar Meish, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Lt. Richard Robert Oakley, Yeomanry, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Benjamin Fiellerup O'Dowda, Royal Engineers
2nd Lt. Bruce Oliver, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Henry Marsden Oliver, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Walter Hugh Ormiston Hugh, London Regiment
Tmp Lt. Evan Edward Owens, RAMC
Lt. William Walter Keith Page, attd. Indian Cavalry
Tmp 2nd Lt. Dennis Lello Adkins Paine MM Royal Warwickshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Robert McAulay Park, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
2nd Lt. William Bullus Parker, East Surrey Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Albert Parry, Worcestershire Regiment
2nd Lt. James Henry Partridge, Royal Irish Fusiliers
Capt. Jesse John Paskin, Worcestershire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Hanna Patterson, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Frederick Charles Peel, General List
Tmp 2nd Lt. Charles Ernest Pegram, Rifle Brigade
Rev. Albert Frederick Pentney, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp 2nd Lt. Francis George Wood Pepper, West Riding Regiment
Capt. Harold Dobson Pickles MB RAMC
Lt. Frederick William Piggin, Yeomanry
2nd Lt. Charles Lawrence Porteous, Royal Irish Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Bennis Hammond Portway, Yeomanry
Rev. Henry Regan Potter, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Capt. William Gerald Howell Powell-Edwards, Yeomanry
Lt. Frank Whitchurch Priaulx, Scots Guards
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Price, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Capt. John Alexander Pridham, RAMC
Capt. Inkerman T. Pritchard, Worcestershire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Arthur Montague William Proctor, Suffolk Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Herbert Victor Pugh, Dorsetshire Regiment
2nd Lt. James William Pugh, West Yorkshire Regiment
Lt. Peter Purcell-Gilpin, Scots Guards
Tmp 2nd Lt. George Forrest Raeside, Royal Lancaster Regiment
Capt. William Taunton Raikes, South Wales Borderers, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Thomas Alexander Rattray, Yeomanry
Lt. Geoffrey Earle Raven, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Ernest Hubert Rawson, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Stanley Richard, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Richards, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. William Victor Richards, Dorsetshire Regiment
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Henry Shred Roberts, Essex Regiment
2nd Lt. John Roberts, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. John Price Roberts, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Thomas Norman Roberts, Royal Garrison Artillery
Capt. William Robertson MB RAMC
Lt. Vyvyan Arthur Hemming Robeson, Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Alfred Robinson, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Tmp 2nd Lt. Gilbert Arthur Robinson, West Yorkshire Regiment
2nd Lt. John Lister Rodger, Yorkshire Light Infantry
2nd Lt. Arthur Boulivant Rogers, Shropshire Light Infantry
2nd Lt. William Wendell Rogers, Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Cyril Williams Rowlands, London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Lionel Matthew Rowlette DSO RAMC
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. George Matthew Runiball, Yeomanry
Lt. Alec Charles Russell, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Cedric Russell MB RAMC
Capt. Henry Thornbury Fox Russell, Royal Welsh Fusiliers and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. George Rutherford, Gordon Highlanders
Tmp Capt. Robert Rutherford MB RAMC
2nd Lt. Albert Henry Salmon, Gordon Highlanders
Tmp 2nd Lt. Eric Denton Samuel, attd. Middlesex Regiment
Capt. Mervyn Savill, London Regiment
Lt. Edward Charles Sawyer, West Yorkshire Regiment
Capt. Alfred Carlisle Sayer, Yeomanry
Tmp 2nd Lt. Percy Scholes, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Shairp, L.C.
Tmp Capt. William Harold Nelson Shakespeare, Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Lawrence Ernest Shaw-Lawrence, East Kent Regiment and Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. Gilbert Recklaw Singleton-Gates, Hampshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. James Anderson Slater, General List and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Ernest Rees Smith, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Frank James Smith MM Royal Berkshire Regiment
Lt. John Hunter Smith, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Joseph Harold Smith, Border Regiment
Lt. Joseph Thomson Smith, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Victor Wallace Smith, Indian Army Reserve of Officers
Tmp 2nd Lt. Isaiah Somerset, Royal Irish Rifles
Lt. Patrick Magnus Spence, Grenadier Guards
Lt. Humphrey Henry Sloane Stanley, Grenadier Guards
Lt. James Stewart, Royal Horse Artillery
Capt. William Stewart, Royal Irish Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Walter John Stokes, Worcestershire Regiment
Lt. Edgar James Stone, Royal Guernsey Light Infantry
Rev. Frank Stone MA Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Capt. Stanley James Stotesbury, Gloucestershire Regiment
Lt. James Strachan, Gordon Highlanders
Lt. Harry Easterbrook Knollys Stranger, Royal Guernsey Light Infantry
Lt. Ralph Tyacke Stratton, Cavalry
Lt. Stewart O'Roke Surridge, York & Lancaster Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Charles Stevens Sutherland, Northumberland Fusiliers
Tmp Capt. Brian Herbert Swift MB RAMC
Lt. Neville Cropley Swift, East Lancashire Regiment
Tmp Capt. John Roy Symes, South Wales Borderers
Tmp Lt. Reginald Stanislaus Victor Talbot, Gloucestershire Regiment
2nd Lt. Harold Vincent Tewson, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Herbert James Thomas, Liverpool Regiment
2nd Lt. Reginald Thomas, South Wales Borderers
Tmp Lt. Ernest John Tytler Thompson, Highland Light Infantry
Tmp 2nd Lt. George Thompson, York & Lancaster Regiment
2nd Lt. Joseph Thompson, West Riding Regiment
Capt. Arthur Peregrine Thomson, RAMC
Tmp 2nd Lt. Douglas Gordon Thomson, Rifle Brigade
2nd Lt. George Frederick Thorn, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Thomas Thornton, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Fred Herbert Thubron, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Thomas Ernest Tildesley, North Staffordshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Alfred Eric Titley, Devonshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Ernest James Tranter, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Thomas Trohear, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Lt. Hugh Martin Trower, Middlesex Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Beazley Tyner DCM Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Leo Francis Veal, West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. George Dibbs King Waldron MB RAMC
2nd Lt. Thomas John Walford, Royal Field Artillery
Lt. James Graham Bryce Walker, Highland Light Infantry
Capt. Douglas Larmer Wall MB RAMC
Lt. William John Ward, London Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Moss Wardell, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. Francis Ernest Warran, attd. Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry
2nd Lt. Frederick Washington, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Tmp Lt. Joseph Gilbert Webb, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Nicholas Victor Webber, Shropshire Light Infantry
Lt. Robert Kemp Wellwood, Seaforth Highlanders
2nd Lt. Edward Harnston Weston, London Regiment
2nd Lt. Frederick Victor White, Royal Field Artillery
Capt. John Donald White DSO Middlesex Regiment
Lt. Robert White, London Regiment
2nd Lt. Arthur Whitfield, Royal Berkshire Regiment
Lt. Arthur George Whittington, Middlesex Regiment
Capt. Dysart Edward Whitworth, Indian Cavalry
Lt. Harold Gwynne Wiggins, Grenadier Guards
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Henry Wild, Lancashire Fusiliers
Lt. Alfred Leonard Wilkes, Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Arthur Stuart Williams, Royal Welsh Fusiliers
2nd Lt. Edward Tom Williams, Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Frank Williams, Royal Engineers
Lt. John Wilson, Yeomanry
Tmp Capt. Emilius Albert Ernest Wilson-Weichart, Army Service Corps
2nd Lt. George Howard Wintle, Gloucestershire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. Gordon Thomas Worn, Norfolk Regiment
2nd Lt. James Wijliam Worth, West Yorkshire Regiment
Lt. Richard Louis Wreford-Brown, Welsh Guards
Rev. Arthur Basil Wright, Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Tmp 2nd Lt. Edward Grigg Wylie, Durham Light Infantry
Capt. James Anderson Young, RAMC
Capt. James Carruthers Young MD RAMC
Capt. John Hamilton Langdon Yorke, Yeomanry
Battery Sergeant Major George Fettis Bowden, Royal Field Artillery
C.S. Maj. Albert Brough DCM West Yorkshire Regiment
C.S. Maj. John Cameron, Royal Highlanders
C.S. Maj. Joseph Carroll, Royal Irish Fusiliers
Sgt. Major Frank Hulbert, RAMC
C.S. Maj. Thomas Jones, South Wales Borderers
C.S. Maj. Herbert Henry Stone, South Wales Borderers
Sgt. Major Robert Millar Lowe Walkinshaw MM London Regiment
Australian Imperial Force
Capt. Cyril Abey, Headquarters, Australian Army Service Corps
Capt. Victor Clarkson Alderson, Infantry
Capt. Arthur Max Allen, Engineers
Capt. Ernest Sleeman Anderson, Engineers
Lt. William Thomas Anderson, Tunneling Company, attd. Mining and Boring Company
Lt. Daniel Herbert Anthon, Infantry
Lt. Reginald Bartley Ashe, Engineers
Capt. Basil Spence Atkinson, Infantry
Rev. Michael Bergin, Australian Chaplains' Department
Lt. Alexander Bickers, Trench Mortar Battery
Capt. Ewen Mackay Bland, Infantry
Rev. Joseph John Booth, Australian Chaplains' Department
Rev. Vivian Roy Bradbury, Australian Chaplains' Department
Lt. Arthur Clarence Brewster, Infantry
Lt. Claude Edmund Burke, Field Artillery
Capt. Edmund Louis Burke, Field Artillery
Capt. Harold Burke, Infantry
Capt. Henry Charles Dight Cadell, Infantry
Capt. Archibald Eric Gordon Campbell, Anzac Imperial Camel Corps
Capt. Cecil James Carroll, Infantry
Capt. Alexander Chalmers, Pioneer Battalion
Capt. Charles Mulso Compigne Chase, Field Artillery
Lt. Frederick Graham Spower Cherry, Infantry, attd. Light Trench Mortar Battery
Lt. Ernest Hector Christian, Infantry
Lt. Raymond Arthur Clarie, Infantry
Capt. Robert Adam Clinton, Tunneling Company, Engineers
Rev. Francis Clune, Australian Chaplains' Department
Lt. Robert Calvin, Infantry
Lt. William Montague Bell Cory, Machine Gun Company
Lt. Charles William Couchman, Infantry, attd. Light Trench Mortar Battery
Capt. George Hinchcliffe Crowther, Infantry
Lt. John Davidson, Imperial Camel Corps
Capt. Algernon Wiseman Davis, Infantry
Capt. Charles Alfred Melbourne Dearham, Infantry
Capt. Keith McKeddie Doig, Australian Army Medical Corps
Lt. Roger Douglas, Machine Gun Company
Rev. William Keith Douglas, Australian Chaplains' Department
Capt. Granville Stuart Down, Ordnance Corps
Lt. Charles Leo Dunn, Pioneer Battalion
Capt. Claude Cadman Easterbrook, Light Horse Regiment
Capt. George Stephenson Elliott, Australian Army Medical Corps
Lt. Albert Bruchiaux Ellis, Artillery
Capt. Alfred William Leslie Ellis, Flying Corps
Capt. Sidney Ernest Evans, Engineers
Capt. Wilfred Evans, Australian Army Medical Corps
Capt. Fred Evans, Light Horse Regiment
Lt. Eric Samuel Everett, Machine Gun Company
Capt. Challenger George Farmer, Australian Army Service Corps
Lt. Robert David Fisher, Infantry
Capt. Stanley Fletcher, Australian Army Veterinary Corps
Capt. Robert Bruce Forsyth, Infantry
Capt. William Murray Fowler, Infantry
Capt. Alexander Fraser, Infantry
Capt. Alexander Hugh Fraser, Infantry
Lt. Herbert John Gee, Light Horse Regiment
Capt. Daniel Robert Glasgow, Australian Army Service Corps
Rev. Hubert Keith Gordon, Australian Chaplains' Department
Capt. Walter Duncross Goudie, Pioneer Battalion
Lt. Norman Graham, Light Trench Mortar Battery
Capt. Frank Clifton Green, Infantry
Lt. James Grieve, Australian Army Ordnance Corps
Capt. Henry James Gurd, Field Artillery
Capt. Ross Alexander Peden Hamilton, Australian Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Hector John Harrison, Infantry
Lt. Gilbert Harry, Infantry
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Herbert Stanley Hawker, Infantry
Capt. John Martin Hawkey, Infantry
Lt. Ronald Graham Henderson, Infantry
2nd Lt. Peter Hendley, Artillery
Lt. Walter Henry Higgins, Engineers
Capt. Robert Irvine Hillard, Infantry
Lt. John Mervyn Hobbs, Artillery
Capt. Richard Hastings Hudson, Australian Army Medical Corps
Lt. Charles Edward Hughes, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. James Dawson Johnston, Infantry, attd. Light Trench Mortar Battery
Lt. Rupert Charles Jones, Infantry
Capt. Coleman Henry Joseph, Engineers
Lt. James Edward Keating, Infantry
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Stanley Roy Kent, Infantry
Capt. Henry Mackay Laity, Australian Army Service Corps
Lt. George Arthur Lamerton, Infantry
Lt. Cyril Lawrence, Engineers
Lt. Harold Alexander Letch, Light Horse Regiment
Lt. John Henry Lilley, Infantry
Lt. James Hemery Lindon, Pioneer Battalion
R.S. Maj. Harry Lindsay, Infantry
Capt. John Caruthers Little, Infantry
Lt. Clarence Robert Collie Lundy, Pioneer Battalion
Capt. Walter Gordon Lush, Engineers
Lt. Andrew Gardiner Macallister, Artillery
Lt. Malcolm Hilliard McDougall, Imperial Camel Corps
Capt. Alfred Oswald McMullin, Artillery
Capt. Edward James McNabb, Infantry
Capt. Harry Akhurst Mann, Infantry
Capt. Henry Fitzgerald Maudsley, Australian Army Medical Corps
Capt. Leonard May, Australian Army Medical Corps
Lt. Charles Wolseley Mercer, Australian Army Service Corps
Rev. Alfred Avery Mills, Australian Chaplains' Department
Capt. Bruce Minter, Artillery
Capt. Gerald Vincent Moriarty, Artillery
Lt. Herbert Fraser Morrison, Infantry
Lt. Walter John Mullett, Australian Army Service Corps
Rev. Thomas Mullins, Chaplain to the Forces, Australian Imperial Force
Capt. Archibald James Murray, Infantry
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. John Francis Murray, Australian Army Medical Corps
Lt. Henry Robert Neale, Infantry
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Frederick Bedford Newell, Infantry
Lt. Alan John Newlands, Infantry, attd. Light Trench Mortar Battery
Lt. George William Norfolk, E. and M. Mining and Boring Company, Engineers
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Douglas Gordon Oakley, Infantry
Lt. John Francis O'Connell, Infantry
Rev. John Edward Norman Osborn MA Australian Chaplains' Department
Capt. George Harry Oswald, Infantry
Capt. Frank Edmund Page, Infantry, attd. Light Trench Mortar Battery
Capt. Ernest Kent Parry, Australian Army Medical Corps
Capt. John Pascoe, Infantry
Capt. Donald Barclay Payne, Infantry
Lt. Harold Ford Pearson, Infantry
Capt. Clarence Abraham Pyke, Australian Army Service Corps
Capt. Cyril Norman Richardson, Infantry
Capt. Arthur Lancelot Rickard, Artillery
Capt. Herbert John Joseph Rigney, Australian Army Service Corps
Lt. Harold Edgar Roach, Artillery
Capt. Leonard Nairn Roach, Infantry
Capt. James Stanley Rogers, Infantry
Capt. George Rosevear, Light Horse Regiment
Capt. Louis Carle Roth, Pioneer Battalion
Lt. Clifford Lionel Clarence Howe, Australian Army Service Corps
Lt. Hugh Russel, Tunneling Company, Engineers
Capt. Arthur Percival St. John, Infantry
Capt. Stanley George Savige, Infantry
Capt. Colin Coape Simson, Australian Army Medical Corps
Capt. George Henry Glencross Smith, Infantry
Lt. Rupert Frank Smith, Engineers
Warrant Officer, 2nd Class, George Snowdon, Artillery
Rev. Alexander MacEwen Stevenson, Australian Chaplains' Department
Capt. John Edward Graham Stevenson, Engineers
Capt. Geoffrey Austin Street, Infantry
Lt. Colin Pride Stumm, Light Horse Regiment
Capt. Charles Bowmont Taylor, Infantry
Warrant Officer, 1st Class, Edgar George Thompson, Artillery
Lt. George Richard Thompson, Engineers
Lt. Stanley Towns, Infantry
Lt. Arthur Harold Traves, Pioneer Battalion
Lt. Francis John Tuckett, Engineers
2nd Lt. John Vincent Tunbridge, Flying Corps
R.S. Maj. Ernest Vernon Tuson, Infantry
Lt. Arthur Cyril Roy Waite, Artillery
Lt. Frederick Mitchell Waite, Light Horse Regiment
Capt. Neville Wallach, Infantry
Rev. Frederick Greenfield Ward, Australian Chaplains' Department
Capt. Augustine William Wardell, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Albert Leslie Watson, Infantry
Lt. Roy Gordon Webster, Infantry
Capt. Robert Marriott William Webster, Australian Army Medical Corps
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Richard Packer Wheeler, Australian Army Medical Corps
Capt. Arthur Charles White, Infantry
Lt. Reginald Wilkinson, attd. Signal Company, Royal Engineers
Rev. Frederick Percy Williams, Australian Chaplains' Department
Lt. Garnet Angus Williamson, Infantry
Capt. Frank Alan Wisdom, Infantry
2nd Lt. Stanley Stuart Woods, Infantry
2nd Lt.-James Sutherland Beavis, Infantry
Capt. Norman Gorton Booth, Infantry
2nd Lt. Alfred Percival Brown, Infantry
Lt. Cecil Olbers Clark, Infantry
Lt. Henry Lawrence Foster, Infantry
Lt. Leslie Hubert Holden, Forestry Corps
Lt. Richard Watson Howard, Forestry Corps
Lt. Frederick George Huxley, Forestry Corps
Capt. Charles Launcelot Moule, Infantry
Capt. Roy Cecil Phillips, Forestry Corps
Lt. Harry Taylor, Forestry Corps
Lt. Gordon Campbell Wilson, Forestry Corps
Lt. William Martin Bermingham, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Lt. Richard Henry Blomfield, Infantry
Lt. John Markham Carter, Light Horse Regiment
2nd Lt. Francis Cawley, Army Service Corps
Lt. Harry Payne Chamberlain, Army Service Corps
Capt. Archibald John Collins, Army Medical Corps
Lt. Charles Robinson Cox, Infantry
Capt. Jack Rupert Cyril Davies, Light Horse Regiment
Lt. William Lezlie Garrard, Infantry
Capt. Telford Graham Gilder, Infantry
Capt. Eric Macallan Gordon-Glassford, Army Medical Corps
Lt. James Norbert Griffin, Light Horse Regiment
Capt. Ferdinand Charles Heberle, Infantry
Lt. Bert James Jackson, Infantry
Lt. Herbert John James, Infantry
Lt. John Heber Johnson, Infantry
Capt. Eric Stanley Kater, Light Horse Regiment
Capt. Hugh Edward Kirkland, Army Medical Corps
Lt. James Kissane, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Ernest William Latchford, Infantry
Capt. Guy Ardlaw Lawrance, Army Medical Corps
Capt. John Shaw. Mackay, Army Medical Corps
Capt. Melrose Holton Mailer, Army Medical Corps
Capt. John Grieve Paterson, Infantry
Capt. Charles Robert Pinney, Infantry
Lt. Thomas Clifton Pittaway, Infantry
Capt. William Dempsey Quilty, Army Medical Corps
Capt. Norman Gordon Rae, Light Horse Regiment
Capt. Albert David Reid, Light Horse Regiment
Capt. Julian Walter Richards, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Rodney Keith Robey, Light Horse Regiment
Capt. Clive Frederic Robinson, Army Medical Corps
Capt. Walter John Rose, Pioneers
Lt. William Richard Staton, Infantry
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Stephen Upton Timewell, Infantry
Lt. Robert Gordon Walduck, Infantry
Capt. and Flight Commander Stanhope Irwing Winter-Irving, Australian Flying Corps
2nd Lt. John Frederiok Wood, Infantry
Canadian Force
Capt. Herbert Charles Allison, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Lt. William Kennedy Anderson, Infantry and Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Alfred Edward Baker, Motor Machine Gun Corps
Capt. James Nunn Bales, Infantry
Lt. Clarence Vivian Bishop, Artillery
Lt. Lennox Graham Black, Infantry, attd. Trench Mortar Battery
Capt. Frank Thompson Bown, Infantry
Capt. Richard Redmond Brough, Infantry
Lt. George Wood Brown, Infantry
Capt. Harry Cauldwell, Labour Company
Capt. Cyril William Upton Chivers, Mounted Rifles
Lt. Charles Levinge Clayton, Infantry, attd. Engineers
Capt. Harry Kelsey Clifton, Infantry
Lt. George Francis Clingan, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. William Bernard Cooper, Labour Corps
Capti. Stanley Lavelle Cunningham, Infantry
Lt. Joseph Dakers, Infantry
Lt. Norman Joyce D'Arcy, Labour Corps
Lt. John Alexander Dewart, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Charles William Dickson, Infantry
Capt. Thomas William Eric Dixon, Mounted Rifles
Lt. Robert Dunlop, Infantry
Lt. Everett Ethridge, Infantry
Lt. Arthur James Everett, Light Horse
Captu Charles Philip Fenwick, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Capt. Eric Barrett Fmley, Infantry
Capt. William Gordon Hanson, Artillery
Capt. Robert John Gardiner, Canadian Army Medical Corps
R.S. Maj. Arthur Garrod, Infantry
Lt. Wallace Robert Gibson, Pioneer Battalion
Lt. Andrew Alfred Gillis, Artillery
Capt. Joseph Edmund Gobeil, Divisional Train
Capt. Thomas Godfrey, Mounted Rifles
Capt. William Douglas Bamford Goodfellow, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Richard Leonard Goodliff, Infantry
Lt. Harold Victor Gould, Infantry
Hon. Capt. Edwin Ernest Graham, Canadian Chaplains' Service
Capt. Melvin John Graham, Infantry
Lt. Thomas Rees Griffith, Infantry
Lt. Eric Wilson Haldenby, Infantry
Lt. Irving Cecil Hall, 12th Company, Canadian Machine Gun Ccrps
Capt. Walter Archibald Harrison, Artillery
Capt. Richard Todd Wilson Herald, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Lt. William Duncan Herridger, Cyclist Company
Capt. Edwin Henry Hill, Infantry
Capt. George William Frances Hodgins, Infantry
Lt. Stanley Burntt Her, Engineers
Lt. Ralph Stanley Jackson, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Arthur Llewellyn Jones, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Capt. Laurence St. George Kelly, Artillery
Capt. Walter de Mayhew King, Light Horse
Capt. Arthur Henry Whittington Landon, Royal Canadian Regiment
Lt. Edwin Ralph Langton, Infantry
Lt. Gerald Bristol Latimer, Engineers
Capt. Ernest Wilkinson Lawrence, Infantry
Capt. William Leggat, Artillery
Lt. John Austin Loy, Artillery
Hon. Capt. Rev. Harold McCausland, Canadian Chaplains' Service
Lt. Duncan Daniel McCaimmon, Railway Troops
Lt. Robert Vernon Macaulay, Artillery
Lt. Merrick Rennie McCracken, Engineers
Lt. Oliver Bain McCuaig, Engineers
Capt. Alan Holmes MacDonald, Pioneer Battalion
Lt. Geoffrey Ernest Macdonald, Infantry
Lt. Robert Ross Macdonald, Infantry
Hon. Capt. Rev. Roderick Andrew MacDonnel, Canadian Chaplains' Service
Lt. llan Alderson McQueen, Artillery
Capt. Francis Gibson Malloch, Engineers
Lt. John Miller, Infantry
R.S. Maj. George Mitten, Infantry
Lt. Lome Cuthbert Montgomery, Infantry
Tmp Lt. George Bennett Morley, Engineers
C.S. Maj. Thomas John Moulds, Infantry
Lt. James Hector Ross Murphy, Infantry
Lt. Robert Newton, Artillery
Capt. George Saher Willis Nicholson, Infantry
Lt. William Me Adam Nickle, Infantry
Capt. Timothy Harold O'Brien, Artillery
Capt. Thomas Patrick O'Kelly, Infantry
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Leo Patenaude, Infantry
Capt. John Millar Pauline, Royal Canadian Regiment
Lt. Hugh Stowell Pedley, Infantry
Lt. Arthur John Plant, Infantry
Capt. Arthur Plow, Infantry
Lt. Harold George Porter, Mounted Rifles
Capt. Laurent Jacques Joseph Puanode, Engineers
Capt. John Edward Puaslow, Infantry
Lt. Colin Esdaile Richardson, Engineers
Lt. William Augustus Richardson, Artillery
Capt. William Francis Richardson, Engineers
Lt. FredRiley, Pioneer Battalion
Lt. William Malcolm Ross, Infantry
Lt. Frank Dalton Scruton, Infantry
Capt. Robert James Shore, Railway Troops
Lt. Lester Luther Spalding, Labour Battalion
Sgt. Major Oscar Percy Stensaud, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Capt. Alan Edgeworth Stewart, Engineers
Lt. Ormond Montgomery Stitt, Engineers
Capt. Richard Arthur Tauton, Infantry
Lt. Melville Tenbrocke, Infantry
Lt. James Balfour Thorn, Engineers
Lt. Melville Fitzgerald Thomson, Infantry
Hon. Capt. Rev. Miles Nicholas Tompkins, Canadian Chaplains Service
Lt. Archer John Toole, Infantry
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. Oliver Travers, Infantry
Lt. Howard Warner Tye, Infantry
Lt. Thomas George Vant, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. William Vassie, Artillery
Lt. Cecil Steven Walley, Engineers
Lt. Henry Ward, Infantry, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Lt. James Ward, Trench Mortar Battery Artillery
Lt. Albert Edward White, Infantry
Lt. Alfred Manson White, Railway Troops
Lt. McLeod White, Engineers
Q.M. and Hon. Capt. James Pye Richardson Whittle, Infantry
Capt. Harry Wishart Whytock, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Capt. Algernon Edward Willaughby, Royal Canadian Regiment
Capt. Richard Todd Wilson Herald, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Lt. Harold Gladstone Wood, Infantry
Lt. Eric Raymond Woodward, Engineers
Capt. Alexander Campbell Young, Engineers
Capt. William Frederick Abbott, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Lt. George Griffith Aitken, Canadian Field Artillery
Lt. Oswald Pearson Arkless, Infantry
Lt. Richard Babb, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. William Cornwallis Bate, Engineers
Lt. James Gordon Beatty, Canadian Field Artillery
Capt. Reginald Vernon Blackburn, Infantry
Lt. Percy Lytton Bonsall, Railway Troops
Lt. Gerard Renvoize Bradbrooke, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Edward Samuel Brett, Infantry
Lt. Donald Cameron, Infantry
Lt. Hugh Clayton Cameron, Infantry
Lt. Lome Douglas Campbell, Infantry
Lt. James Murdoch Christie, Infantry
Lt. Shirley Adam Clarke, Infantry
Rev. Thomas Collins Colwell, Canadian Chaplains Service
Capt. Albert Ernest Horsman Coo, Infantry
Lt. William Joseph Cowen, Cavalry
Lt. Charles Douglas Crowe, Canadian Field Artillery
Capt. Henry Clarke Davis, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Rev. William Henry Davis, Canadian Chaplains Service
Lt. Irvin Harrison Dawson, Canadian Field Artillery
Lt. Arthur Wemyss Deacon, Mounted Rifles
Lt. William Edward Denley, Infantry
Lt. Joshua Emile Dorey, Infantry
Lt. George Frederick Douglas, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Russell Howard Elliott, Infantry
Lt. Matthew Langdon Ellis, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Arthur Thomas Field, Infantry
Lt. Edward William Fleming, Cavalry
Lt. Norman Franks, Infantry
Lt. John Howard Gainor, Infantry
Lt. John Stupart Galbraith, Infantry
Capt. Donald Arthur Gait, Infantry
Lt. Ernest Irving Gill, Canadian Field Artillery
Lt. Alexander Watson Gregory, Infantry
Lt. Alexander Grant Gunn, Infantry
Lt. Joseph Robson Hardy, Infantry
Lt. Edward Hart, Garrison Artillery
Lt. John Curtis Hartley, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Robert Angus Hay, Engineers
Lt. Clarence Bruce Hill, Canadian Field Artillery
Lt. Arthur Ernest Hall Holland, Infantry
Lt. Bertram Edward Hull, Infantry
Capt. Walter Jewitt, Infantry
Lt. Herbert Hough ton Johnson, Engineers
Lt. William Johnstons, Infantry
Lt. Frederick Howard Marling Jones, Engineers
Lt. Howard Kennedy, Engineers
Capt. Frank Clifton Little, Infantry
Lt. Haydon Stratton Lyle, Mounted Rifles
Lt. Donald Bain MacCaskill, Infantry
Lt. Keith Campbell MacGowan, Infantry
Capt. James Frederick Stewart Marshall, Army Medical Corps
Lt. Leslie Martin, Infantry
Lt. James Mavor, Mounted Rifles
Lt. Arthur William May, Infantry
Rev. Thomas McCarthy, Canadian Chaplains Service
Lt. Merrick Rennie McCracken, Engineers
Lt. James Maxwell McIlquham, Canadian Field Artillery
Lt. Robert McIntyre, Infantry
Lt. Alfred Edward McKay, Infantry
Lt. James Day McKeown, Canadian Field Artillery
Lt. Joseph Graham McKnight, Infantry
Lt. Brydone de Blois Millidge, Canadian Field Artillery
Capt. William Gordon Moffatt, Infantry
Capt. Thomas Williamson Moore, Army Medical Corps
Lt. William Cedric Nicholson, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Lt. Fleming Pinkston O'Reilly, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Beecher Doran Poyser, Mounted Rifles
Capt. Henry Frederick Preston, Army Medical Corps
Lt. Brian Lee Reid, Railway Troops
Capt. Walter Hepburn Scott, Army Medical Corps
Lt. James Gordon Searles, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Raymond Sellar, Infantry
Lt. Bernard Shipton MM Mounted Rifles
Lt. Charles Dayrell Shreve, Canadian Field Artillery
Lt. Edmund George Alpheus Smart, Infantry
Lt. William Henry Smith, Railway Troops
Lt. Rolsa Eric Smythe, Infantry
Rev. Thomas Hudson Stewart, Canadian Chaplains Service
Capt. Ray Farquhar Studd, Infantry
Lt. Howard Sutherland, Infantry
Lt. Albert Ernest Thorne, Infantry
Tmp Capt. John William Tipton, Infantry
Lt. John Arnold Trewhitt, Canadian Field Artillery
Lt. Ray Hargreave Warne, Mounted Rifles
Lt. William Chester Warren, Infantry
Capt. Ernest Coulter Whitehouse, Canadian Army Medical Corps
Capt. Le Roy Zimmerman Wilson, Railway Troops
Lt. Fred Campbell Young, Acting Battery, Machine Gun Corps
C.S. Maj. James Campbell Hutchison, Infantry
C.S. Maj. John Nash, Mounted Rifles
Lt. Harry McNeven Alexander, Infantry
Lt. Robert Andrews, Mounted Rifles Battalion
Lt. Gordon Henry Applegath, Infantry
Lt. Harold Lynn Atto, Mounted Rifles Battalion
Capt. Edwin Godfrey Phipps Baker, Infantry
Lt. John Balfour, Cyclist Battalion
Capt. Leonard Halliday Bertram, Infantry
Lt. Wilford Edward Bull, Engineers
Lt. Harry Maxwell Camp, Infantry
Lt. Glidden Campbell, Infantry
Lt. Leonard Proctor Chalmers, Infantry
Lt. Herbert Read Christie, Engineers
Lt. Walter Findlay Clarke, Royal Canadian Horse Artillery
Lt. Joseph Patrick Connolly, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Louis Auguste Coulin, Infantry
Lt. Vernon Bland Crothers, Dragoons
Lt. Gordon Charles Davidson, Mounted Rifles Battalion
Lt. Tempest Carroll McPherson St. Etienne de Wolf, Infantry
Capt. Edgar Douglas, Army Medical Corps
Lt. Clarence Johnston Dryden, Infantry
Lt. William Waugh Dunlop, Infantry
Lt. George Hendry Ferguson, Engineers
Lt. William Frank Findlay, Infantry
Capt. Arthur Douglas Fisken, Infantry
Lt. Cecil John French, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Harry Roy Gifford, Mounted Rifles Battalion
Lt. Charles Victor Grantham, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. James Hamilton, Infantry
Lt. Charles Edwin Fulcher Hiscocks, Infantry
Lt. George Hobson, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. William Gilbert Humphries, Field Artillery
Lt. Charles Meldrum Inglis, Infantry
Capt. Austin Dwight Irvine, Army Medical Corps
Lt. Hector John Roderick Jackson, Engineers
Lt. Harry Jardine, Field Artillery
Capt. Gordon Leigh Jepson, Army Medical Corps
Lt. Walter Wallace Johnson, Infantry
Capt. Arthur Ellis Jones, Labour Battalion
Lt. Joseph John Kavanagh, Infantry
Lt. Arthur Rubin Kilborn, Infantry
Lt. Robert Duff Kinmond, Engineers
Lt. Harold Oakley Leach, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Gerald Charles Huntingdon Lindsell, Infantry
Lt. Alexander William Logie, Mounted Rifles Battalion
Lt. James Boyd Maclachlan, Garrison Artillery
Lt. Alexander MacLean, Field Artillery
Lt. Norman Philips Macleod, Garrison Artillery
Capt. James Grant MacNeill, Army Medical Corps
Lt. James Forrest Currie Maunder, Field Artillery
Lt. Roderick George May, Lord Strathcona's Horse
Lt. Vivian-Stewart Cass McClenaghan, Engineers
Lt. Ernest Victor McKague, Cyclist Corps
Lt. Donald Grant McNeil, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Harry Lyall McPherson, Field Artillery
Lt. Charles Edmund McRae, Infantry
Capt. William Blight Megloughlin, Infantry
Capt. John McIntosh Millar, Infantry
Lt. Leslie Howard Millar, Mounted Rifles Battalion
Lt. Bernhard Coeure Montagnon, Machine Gun Corps
Lt. George Murray, Infantry
Tmp Capt. William Henry Douglas Murray, Railway Construction Company
Lt. Arthur Nicholls, Royal Canadian Regiment
Lt. Rupert Austin Orme, Infantry
Lt. Richmond Archie Payne, Infantry
C.S. Maj. Charles Peacock, Infantry
Tmp Lt. George Peck, Railway Construction Company
Lt. Maurice Arthur Pope, Engineers
Lt. Sidney Quinton, Infantry
Lt. Edward Leonard Rainboth, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Theodore Hampton Oswald Rayward, Infantry
Lt. Charles Stanley Reed-Riches, Army Service Corps
Capt. Harold Roche, Field Artillery
Lt. Herbert Mackenzie Ross, Infantry
Capt. John Horace Roy, Infantry
Lt. Hugh McMaster Scott, Infantry
Capt. Wesley Herbert Secord, Army Medical Corps
Capt. William Ewing Sinclair, Army Medical Corps
Lt. Warren Russell Skey, Field Artillery
Capt. John Onion Slaght, Infantry
Lt. Sydney Welton Thurber, Infantry
Lt. William Vernon, Infantry
Lt. William Frederick Welch, Infantry
Lt. Leonard Alfred Welsh, Lord Strathcona's Horse
Capt. John Douglas Young, Infantry
Newfoundland Force
Lt. Stanley Charles Goodyear, Newfoundland Regiment
2nd Lt. Gerald Joseph Whitty, Newfoundland Regiment
New Zealand Force
Capt. Forbes Herbert Anderson, Army Service Corps
Capt. Norman Annabell, Headquarters, Engineers
Lt. Ralph FitzRoger Bidwell Beetham, Mounted Rifles
Lt. Ralph John Black, Engineers
2nd Lt. Guy Bridgeman, Artillery
Capt. William Gillers Borrie MB New Zealand Medical Corps
Capt. David Bruce, Pioneer Battalion
Capt. John Connor MB New Zealand Medical Corps
Lt. James Type Dallinger, 1st Battalion, Wellington Regiment
Capt. Harry Delamere Dansey, Pioneer Battalion
Lt. Arthur Gordon Dean, 1st Battalion, Canterbury Regiment
Capt. Robert Wakelin Dunn, Artillery
Capt. James Evans, Infantry
Lt. Alfred Onslow Glasse, Engineers
Capt. Kenneth Farquharson Gordon, New Zealand Medical Corps
2nd Lt. Fritz Stanley Goulding, New Zealand Rifle Brigade
2nd Lt. Gordon Verney Gow, New Zealand Rifle Brigade
Q.M. and Hon. Lt. Roland Justice Hill, Otago Regiment
Lt. Christopher Ingram, Auckland Regiment
Capt. James Gordon Jeffery, Artillery
Capt. Frederick Noel Johns MB New Zealand Medical Corps
Lt. Henry Mark Keesing, New Zealand Rifle Brigade
Lt. Edward Levien, Mounted Rifles Regiment
Lt. Gerald Lyon, Field Artillery
Lt. Ewen John McGregor, Machine Gun Corps
Capt. Hector Campbell MacKenzie, Machine Gun Corps
Rev. Walter McClean, New Zealand Chaplains' Department
Capt. Cyril Henry Molloy, Otago Regiment
Capt. Bruce Haultain Morison, Wellington Regiment
Capt. Thomas Wyville Leonard Rutherford, Canterbury Regiment
2nd Lt. George Albert Tuck, Auckland Regiment
Capt. Joseph Kendrick Venables, New Zealand Medical Corps
2nd Lt. Walter George Wainscott, Engineers
Capt. William Huatahi Walker, Pioneer Battalion
Capt. Malcolm McPherson Watt, Otago Regiment
Lt. Alfred Thomas White, Wellington Regiment
Capt. Thomas Martin Wilkes, Rifle Brigade
Capt. Newman Robert Wilson, Canterbury Regiment
2nd Lt. Charles Ronald McKenzie, New Zealand Field Artillery
Lt. Malcolm Carmichael Milne, Mounted Rifles
2nd Lt. Ernest Horton Picot, New Zealand Machine Gun Corps
Lt. Kenneth James Tait, Mounted Rifles
Capt. Rex Carrington Brewster FRCS Medical Corps
2nd Lt. Allan Farquhar, Canterbury Regiment
2nd Lt. Charles Albert Gray, Canterbury Mounted Rifles Regiment
Capt. George Herbert Gray, Canterbury Regiment
2nd Lt. Randolph Norman Gray, Canterbury Regiment
Lt. John Nelmes Hines, Otago Regiment
Lt. Alfred Cecil Christian Hunter, Canterbury Regiment
Lt. Hugh Johnston, Canterbury Regiment
Lt. David McAuley, Otago Regiment
Capt. Robert Francis Mitchell, Otago Mounted Rifles
Lt. Caro James Pierce, Wellington Mounted Rifles Regiment
South African Force
Tmp Capt. Philip Harold Guise Brown, Infantry
Tmp Paymaster and Hon. Lt. Alfred George Charter, Rifles
Tmp Lt. Alfred Edgar Court, Rifles
Capt. Edward Arthur Davies, Infantry
Lt. Percival Henry Ellis, Infantry
Tmp Capt. Alexander Buchan Fyffe, South African Service Corps
Tmp 2nd Lt. William Edward Harris, Infantry
Tmp Capt. Samuel Heath, South African Service Corps (East African)
Capt. Ernest Hill, South African Medical Corps
Tmp Capt. Edmund Mullinger Jarvis, Veterinary Corps
Tmp Capt. Simon Frederick Kos, Engineers (Wireless Section)
Lt. William Maclean, Infantry
Tmp Capt. Francis McEwan Mitchell, Infantry
Capt. Duncan Macmillan, Motor Cyclist Corps
Tmp Capt. Benjamin Thomas Kelly Markham, South African Service Corps
2nd Lt. Samuel Marshall, Signal Company
2nd Lt. Percy Charles Neille, Infantry
Lt. Robert Okell, Engineer Troops
Tmp Lt. Immers de Maurigsault Overbeck, South African Service Corps
Tmp Capt. Arthur Llewellyn Pepper, South African Defence Force
Lt. Harry Rissik, South African Forces
2nd Lt. Wilfred Frank Steedman, Infantry, attd. Intel Department
Tmp Lt. James Gordon Stewart, Artillery
Lt. William Twist, Engineers Troops
Battery Sergeant Major Arthur James Wardill, Artillery
R.S. Maj. Robert Wells, Infantry
Tmp Capt. William Grahame Wood, Infantry
Tmp Capt. William Howorth Wood, Engineers
Awarded a Bar to the Military Cross (MC*)[edit]
Tmp 2nd Lt. Robert Edgar Herring MC Army Service Corps
Lt. Alfred Cyril Whitworth Hobson MC Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Edward Percy Noel Jones MC Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Robert Briffault MC MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. Maurice Smith Bryce MC MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. George Beatty Burwell MC MB RAMC
Tmp Capt. Eric Cornwallis Day MC Shropshire Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Gerald Hugh de la Pasture MC King's African Rifles
Lt. Edwin Arthur Eden MC Royal Artillery
Tmp Capt. Charles Hugh Emerson MC Lincolnshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Harold Charles de Courcy Evans MC King's African Rifles
Capt. Gerard William Hodgkinson MC Yeomanry and Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Edward Haughton James MC Yeomanry, attd. Dorsetshire Regiment
Capt. Stephen Grey Latham MC Northamptonshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. James MacGregor MC MD RAMC
Rev. Canon Arthur Edwin Ross MC Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Capt. Walter Somerville Scott MC Lancashire Fusiliers, attd. Royal Flying Corps
2nd Lt. William Skeat MC Essex Regiment
Tmp Lt. Maurice Strode MC Royal West Surrey Regiment
2nd Lt. George William Symes MC York & Lancaster Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Capt. Bernard Charles Tennent MC MD RAMC
Lt. George Gustavus Walker MC Scots Guards
Capt. Charles Louis Waters MC Royal Berkshire Regiment
Lt. Arthur Cecil Willison MC Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Lt. Christopher Geoffrey Woolner MC Royal Engineers
Lt. Jehu Fosbrooke Gerrard Aubin MC Durham Light Infantry
Lt. Reginald Andrew Bateman MC Manchester Regiment, attd. Royal Warwickshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Robert Ernest Beckerson MC Norfolk Regiment
Tmp Lt. Wilfred Dennes MC Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Edward Edwards MC Lincolnshire Regiment
Capt. Austin Gardner MC Essex Regiment
2nd Lt. John King George MC Gloucestershire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Albert Ernest Haynes MC Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. John Purslow Howells MC Royal West Surrey Regiment
Lt. Frederick Chater Jack MC Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Thomas Jenkins MC Royal Field Artillery
2nd Lt. Charles Kelly MC London Regiment
2nd Lt. Russell Medley Leake MC North Lancashire Regiment
Tmp 2nd Lt. John Winter Little MC Border Regiment
Lt. Maurice Stanley Lush MC Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Sidney Albert Macey MC Devonshire Regiment
2nd Lt. Francis James Charles Marshall MC Devonshire Regiment
Lt. Frederick William Broadbent Maufe MC Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Albert Edward Odell MC General List, attd. Royal Engineers
Tmp Capt. Arthur John Hinkson Patten MC Norfolk Regiment
Lt. Winthrop Pyemont MC Royal Engineers
Tmp Surgeon James Ness McBean Ross MC MD RN attd. Royal Marines
2nd Lt. Sydney John Cenlivres Russell MC Border Regiment
Capt. Robert Bell Stewart MC RAMC
2nd Lt. Bernard Watson Stirling MC Royal Field Artillery
Tmp 2nd Lt. Joseph Summerville MC Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. Francis Ruthven Thornton MC MB RAMC
Lt. Owen Murton Wales MC South Wales Borderers
2nd Lt. George Sholto Ripley Webb MC Royal Berkshire Regiment, attd. Trench Mortar Battery
Tmp Lt. John Wells MC Devonshire Regiment
2nd Lt. William Gladstone Wylie MC Durham Light Infantry
Capt. Cuthbert Delaval Shafto Agassiz MC MD RAMC
Lt. John Samuel Aikman MC Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
2nd Lt. George Henry Garstin Anderson MC Rifle Brigade
Tmp Lt. Thomas Geoffrey Lyon Ashwell MC Rifle Brigade
2nd Lt. Felix Charles Baker MC London Regiment
2nd Lt.-Stuart Gordon Beer MC London Regiment
Tmp Capt. Arthur Joseph Blake MC RAMC
Capt. Richard Bryans MC Shropshire Light Infantry
Tmp Capt. Edward Alexander Chisholm MC Royal Field Artillery
Lt. William Hofmeyr Craib MC Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Thomas Henry Clifford Davis MC Royal Field Artillery
Capt. Richard Day MC Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Harold Anthony Denison MC Kings Royal Rifle Corps
Capt. Eric Alfred Charles Fazan MC RAMC
Lt. Oswald Spencer Francis MC Royal Berkshire Regiment
Lt. Arnold Fraser-Campbell MC Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Tmp Capt. Harry Percy Bright-Gough MC Welsh Regiment
Capt. John Frederick Hodges MC Royal Irish Fusiliers
Lt. Claud Mitchell Hughes-Games MC Gloucestershire Regiment
Rev. Joseph Wellington Hunkin MC Royal Army Chaplains' Department
Lt. William Stewart Ironside MC Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Henry Harris Jago MC Devonshire Regiment
Lt. Edward William Francis Jephson MC Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Capt. Percy Lewis Jones MC Royal Garrison Artillery
Lt. William Knight MC Essex Regiment
Lt. Conrad Lally MC Royal Flying Corps
Lt. Godfrey Frank Mackwood Ling MC West Yorkshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. James Wallace Macfarlane MC MB RAMC
Lt. Loudoun James MacLean MC Royal Engineers, and Royal Flying Corps
Tmp Capt. Edward Leslie Marshall MC Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers
Capt. Samuel McCausland MC RAMC
Lt. James Kenneth McConnel DSO MC Hussars
Capt. Austin Timaeus Miller MC Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Tmp Lt. Vincent Newton Moss MC East Kent Regiment
Tmp Lt. Clarence Mumford MC South Wales Borderers
2nd Lt. Randolph Nicholson MC Royal Field Artillery
Lt. Basil Conquest Pascoe MC Rifle Brigade
Tmp Lt. Harold Edward Pope MC Royal Garrison Artillery
2nd Lt. Henry Godden Rerrie MC York & Lancaster Regiment
Lt. Derek Charles Houghton Richardson MC Lancers
Tmp Lt. Abraham Rothfield MC Durham Light Infantry
Lt. Hugh Rowlands MC London Regiment
Capt. Desmond Henry Sykes Somerville MC South Wales Borderers
Lt. Aubrey Causton Strachan MC Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Peter Thompson MC Northumberland Fusiliers
Capt. Joseph Stephen Wallace MC RAMC
Tmp Capt. William Edward Walter-Symons MC Royal Garrison Artillery
Tmp Capt. Philip Ernest Williams MC Royal Welsh Fusiliers
Australian Imperial Force
Capt. David MacDonald Steele MC Australian Army Medical Corps
Canadian Force
Capt. Gerald Gardiner Anglin MC Infantry
Capt. Edward James Clark MC Mounted Rifles
Lt. Alfred Henry Cowie MC Infantry
Capt. The Hon. Francis Egerton Grosvenor MC Infantry
Capt. Melville Mason Hart MC Mounted Rifles
Capt. Donald Bruce Martyn MC Infantry
Lt. Harry Leonard Nowell Salmon MC Infantry
Lt. Lewis Younger MC Infantry
Newfoundland Force
Capt. Reginald Grant Paterson MC Newfoundland Regiment
Awarded a Second Bar to the Military Cross (MC**)[edit]
Lt. Edward Budd MC* Irish Guards
Tmp Capt. Fred Roland Berridge MC* Northamptonshire Regiment
Tmp Capt. George D'Rastrik Carr MC* RAMC
Sub-Lt. Walter Kilroy Harris MC* Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Tmp Lt. Victor Cadifor Hilditch MC* Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Charles Hubert Anthony Huxtable MC* Royal Field Artillery
Tmp Lt. Harold Arthur Redding MC* Suffolk Regiment
Tmp Capt. John Alexander Walbeoffe-Wilson MC* Middlesex Regiment
2nd Lt. Alfred Clarence Youdale MC* Royal Flying Corps
Distinguished Conduct Medal (DCM)[edit]
C.S. Maj. S. Aberdeen, Durham Light Infantry (Durham)
C.S. Maj. D. Adair, East Yorkshire Regiment (Durham)
Sgt. A. L. Adams, Royal Engineers (Edinburgh)
Sgt. J. H. Adams, Royal Engineers (Brislington)
Sgt. J. Adamson, Yorkshire Regiment (East Ramton)
Dvr. H. F. Addington, Royal Field Artillery (Church Brampton, Northampton)
C.S. Maj. W. H. Albutt, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Sparkbrook)
Sgt. F. G. Aldridge, Royal Engineers (Evesham, Worcester)
Petty Officer J. Allan, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Annitsford)
Cpl. A. Allen, Royal Garrison Artillery (Belfast)
C.S. Maj. W. T. Alloway, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (Marlow)
Pte. C. Andrews, Royal West Kent Regiment (Poplar, London)
Sgt. A. H. Annear, Royal Garrison Artillery (Plymouth, Devon)
Sgt. C. F. Ash, Royal Garrison Artillery (Chatham)
L. Cpl. H. P. Ashton, Royal Engineers (Moorhurst, Hamps.)
Sgt. W. Askew, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Kenilworth)
Gnr. C. H. G. Anthony, Royal Field Artillery (Aston, Birmingham)
C.Q.M.S. A. J. Appleby, Royal Engineers (Clapton Park)
Sgt. W. J. Avis, Machine Gun Corps (Lewes)
L. Cpl. J. F. Bagshaw, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Walsall)
Cpl. G. Bailey, Royal Field Artillery (Bristol)
Sgt. F. J. Baker, Royal Field Artillery (Wdlworth)
C.S. Maj. H. T. Baldwin, Hampshire Regiment (Wimbledon, London)
Battery Sergeant Major J. H. Barlow, Royal Field Artillery (Woolwich)
Battery Sergeant Major J. Barnes, Royal Field Artillery (Ramsey, Huntingdon)
Pte. S. Barnes, Manchester Regiment (Oldham)
C.S. Maj. J. Barraclough, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Wakefield)
Capt. J. C. S. Barron, Royal Engineers (North Shields)
Act. C.S. Maj. J. Bartlett, Royal Sussex Regiment (Eastbourne)
Sgt. H. Barton, Royal Irish Fusiliers (Jerrettspas, Newry)
Cpl. J. S. Bastick, Norfolk Regiment (Bethnal Green, London)
Gnr. S. Bate, Royal Field Artillery (Hartlepool)
Sgt. J. Bates, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers (Liemaskea, County Fermanagh)
Bombr. A. H. Baylis, Royal Field Artillery (Worcester)
C.S. Maj. J. Beaton, Scottish Rifles (Balmain, N.S.W.)
Pte. I. Beaty, Royal Scots (Manchester)
Sgt. W. Bee, Manchester Regiment (Harlesden, London)
Pte. J. Bell, West Riding Regiment (Greenfield)
Act. R.S. Maj. G. F. Bennett, Tank Ops (Leicester)
Pte. W. Bennett, Manchester Regiment (Handforth, Cheshire)
L. Sgt. M. Berkley, Cheshire Regiment (Hirst Ashington, Northumberland)
Sgt. J. Berwick, Border Regiment (Workingdon)
L. Sgt. A. Bickerstaffe, South Lancashire Regiment (St. Helens)
Cpl. F. Birch, Leicestershire Regiment (Hinckley, Leics.)
Gnr. E. Blackwood, Royal Garrison Artillery (Coatbridge)
C.Q.M.S. C. J. Bland, Middlesex Regiment (Upper Holloway, London)
Battery Sergeant Major A. J. Blowers, Royal Field Artillery (Lowestoft)
Battery Sergeant Major J. Blundell, Royal Garrison Artillery (Cork)
Bombr. H. Blythe, Royal Field Artillery (Mansfield, Notts)
Act. Bombr. S. A. Blythe, Royal Garrison Artillery (Melton, Norfolk)
Sgt. H. Bottomley, RAMC (Colchester)
Battery Sergeant Major J. T. Boughen, Royal Field Artillery (Netley)
Sgt. F. Bowcock, Royal Field Artillery (Leek, Staffs.)
2nd Cpl. F. Bownasa, Royal Engineers (E. Bradford)
Sgt. C. H. Boyle, Royal Garrison Artillery (Kingston Hill, Surrey)
L. Sgt. G. T. Boynes, North Lancashire Regiment (Preston)
Sgt. J. Bracegirdle, Royal Garrison Artillery (Carnarvon)
Sgt. S. Bradshaw, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Cpl. S. G. Brain, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Banbury)
C.S. Maj. E. Brake, Somerset Light Infantry (Bath)
Gnr. W. Breakey, Tank Corps. (Edinburgh)
Sgt. H. G. Bridges, Royal Horse Artillery (St. Leonards-on-Sea)
C.S. Maj. E. J. Briffet, Royal Engineers (Bristol)
Act. Staff Sergeant A. Briggs, Army Ordnance Corps (Walworth)
Sgt. B. Briggs, Labour Corps. (Kennington Park, London)
Cpl. F. Briggs, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Cpl. of Horse W. H. E. Briton, Dragoon Guards (Hereford)
Cpl. A. T. Brooker, Royal Horse Artillery
Battery Sergeant Major F. A. Broomfield, Royal Field Artillery (Stratford, London)
C.S. Maj. A. Broomhead, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Derby)
C.S. Maj. G. Browell, Northumberland Fusiliers (Newcastle)
Sgt. A. (Brown, York & Lancaster Regiment (Thurnscoe, near Barnsley)
Sgt. A. Brown, Royal Field Artillery (Padiham, Lancaster)
Sgt. J. Brown, Royal Engineers (Mulrkirk)
C.S. Maj. G. Brown, Norfolk Regiment (Thixendale, Malton, Yorkshire)
Cpl. G. D. Brown, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Newton, Yorkshire)
Cpl. W. Brunton, Royal Garrison Artillery (Edinburgh)
C.S. Maj. R. H. Bryan, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Coventry)
Sgt. F. C. Bryson, Royal Garrison Artillery (Temple Ewell)
C.S. Maj. J. F. Buchanan, Gordon Highlanders (Aberdeen)
Sgt. E. Bullock, Machine Gun Corps (Broseley)
L. Cpl. L. J. Burden, Tank Corps. (Bridgtown)
Cpl. A. Burnett, Royal Field Artillery (Preston)
C.S. Maj. W. Burndge, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Swansea)
Cpl. H. Burrows, Royal Garrison Artillery (North Waisliam)
Sgt. W. Burrows, Royal Field Artillery (Forest Gate)
Sgt. W. C. Burton, Royal Engineers (Hackney)
Cpl. A. C. Caiger, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (Malvern)
Sgt. J. Cairney, Royal Engineers (Glasgow)
C.S. Maj. A. W. Calder, Seaforth Highlanders (Carr Bridge)
Far. Sergeant W. W. Canham, Royal Field Artillery (Kilkenny)
B.Q.M. Sgt. T. W. Carefoot, East Lancashire Regiment (Burnley)
Battery Sergeant Major J. Carlyle, Royal Field Artillery (Manchester)
Sgt. J. Carmichael, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Chorlton-cum-Hardy)
C.Q.M.S. W. H. Carnie, Welsh Regiment (Cardiff)
Sgt. J. Cassidy, West Yorkshire Regiment (Lincoln)
L. Sgt. L. Chalk, Northamptonshire Regiment (Abbot Langley)
Pte. E. Chambers, North Staffordshire Regiment (Cambefley, Surrey)
C.S. Maj. J. Chance, Worcestershire Regiment (Ryde, Isle of Wight)
C.S. Maj. G. Chandler, Leicestershire Regiment (Cheadle, Staffs.)
Sgt. T. Chapman, Lincolnshire Regiment (Hognaby, Spilsby)
Battery Sergeant Major G. Chappell, Royal Field Artillery (E. London)
Pte. H. Charlton, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Awsworth)
Sgt. J. C. Charlton, Yorkshire Regiment (Middlesbrough)
C.Q.M.S. J. E. Cherry, East Lancashire Regiment (Colne)
L. Cpl. A. Chesters, Royal Lancaster Regiment (E. Lancaster)
Sgt. E. Chidgey, Royal Engineers (North Petherton)
Far. Q.M.S. W. A. Chmery, Royal Horse Artillery (Frimley, Surrey)
B.Q.M. Sgt. W. H. Christy, Manchester Regiment (Wigan)
Sgt. W. Chrystall, Royal Field Artillery (Aberdeen)
Sgt. W. Churchill, Northumberland Fusiliers (Wallsend)
Sgt. W. B. Churchman, Royal Engineers (College Park, London)
Act. Cpl. G. Clark, Royal Highlanders (Kirkcaldy)
L. Cpl. J. W. Clark, Durham Light Infantry (Easington Colliery)
L. Cpl. R. C. Clark, Royal Engineers (Leytonstone)
C.S. Maj. A. W. Clarke, Army Cyclist Corps (Basington)
Pte. W. L. Claydon, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Colchester)
Sgt. W. Clayton, Royal Garrison Artillery (Uxbridge)
Cpl. W. E. Clayton, Royal Garrison Artillery (Poplar, London)
Regimental Q.M.S. J. H. Code, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
C.S. Maj. W. Coldwell, Lincolnshire Regiment (Sheffield)
Sgt. A. J. Cole, Somerset Light Infantry (Henhin, near Bristol)
Sgt. A. Coles, South Wales Borderers (Withington Station, near Hereford)
R.S. Maj. J. T. Colver, Yorkshire Regiment (Leicester)
Pte. E. A. Comer, Dragoon Guards (Addlebourne)
Battery Sergeant Major H. F. Conway, Royal Field Artillery (Uxbridge)
C.S. Maj. J. B. Cook, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Walney)
Sgt. F. J. Cooper, East Surrey Regiment (Shoeburyness)
Sgt. J. Cooper, Gordon Highlanders (Glasgow)
Sgt. T. Cooper, Essex Regiment (Swaffam, Buibeck, Camb.)
C.S. Maj. E. Copping, Grenadier Guards (Clapham Junction)
Cpl. W. Cornell, Royal Field Artillery (Saffron Walden)
Sgt. W. H. Couldwell, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (Reading)
Warrant Officer Class 2 W. J. Coward, Gloucestershire Regiment (Stroud, Glouc.)
Pte. J. Cowell, Welsh Regiment (Llandudno)
B.Q.M. Sgt. A. J. Cowley, Royal Field Artillery (Glanworth, County Cork)
Far. Staff Sergeant L. Crabtree, Royal Field Artillery (Exeter)
Sgt. J. Croft, Royal Irish Rifles (Dunmurry)
B.Q.M. Sgt. W. Crombie, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Carlow)
A. Bombardier A. W. Crook, Royal Garrison Artillery (Stamford)
Sgt. C. E. Crooks, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Mansfield Woodhouse)
Sgt. J. W. Crosby, Royal Garrison Artillery (Wickford, Essex) Royal Marine Artillery
Cpl. F. Cross, Royal Marine Artillery
Cpl. C. H. Crowlie, Royal Field Artillery (Fulbam, London)
C.Q.M.S. G. Crump, Worcestershire Regiment (Worcester)
Sgt. W. Cryer, Lancashire Fusiliers (Facit, Lancaster)
Sgt. W. Cunniugton, Royal Field Artillery (Huddersfield)
C.S. Maj. F. Currey, Durham Light Infantry (Darlington)
B.Q.M. Sgt. J. Currie, Royal Garrison Artillery (Barrow-in-Furness)
C.S. Maj. G. Cuswoxth, West Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Sgt. R. Cuthall, Royal Field Artillery (Arbroath)
C.S. Maj. W. F. Dachtier, London Regiment (London)
Battery Sergeant Major H. Daft, Royal Garrison Artillery (Clayton)
Battery Sergeant Major W. G. Dagg, Royal Field Artillery (Emsworth)
Sgt. J. Diare, South Wales Borderers (Llanhilleth, Mon.)
Act. R.S. Maj. P. Darroch, Royal Scots (Prestonpans)
Sgt. E. N. Davey, Royal Engineers (Wimbledon Park)
L. Sergeant H. V. Davey, Army Cyclist Corps (Hamworth)
Act. R.S. Maj. J. C. Davidge, Welsh Regiment (Abergavemiy)
2nd Cpl. J. H. Davies, Royal Engineers (Softball)
R.S. Maj. W. Davies, South Wales Borderers (Poanswick, Glouc.)
Pte. G. Davis, Border Regiment (Bishopstake)
Sgt. L. Dawe, Royal Field Artillery (Walthamstow)
Sgt. M. Dawes, Royal Field Artillery (Burnley)
Gnr. F. G. C. Dawson, Royal Garrison Artillery (Blackheath)
Battery Sergeant Major E. Day, Royal Horse Artillery (Great Staughton, near St. Neots)
Sgt. F. C. Debenham, Royal Field Artillery (Bergholt, near Colchester)
C.S. Maj. C. J. Deeprose, Royal Sussex Regiment (Rye)
L. Cpl. A. Devenish, Northumberland Fusiliers (Cornsay, County Durham)
C.S. Maj. E. Dickinson, Machine Gun Corps (Grimsby)
Sgt. F. Dickinson, Middlesex Regiment (Leith, Scotland)
Pte. M. Dixon, Shropshire Light Infantry (Gelli, Rhondda)
Cpl. Fitter, W. Dixon, Royal Field Artillery (Leeds)
L. Cpl. G. W. H. Dobson, Military Mounted Police (Whiteleafe, Surrey)
Sgt. G. Donaldson, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Milford)
Sgt. E. J. Donhou, Royal Engineers (Hanwell, London)
Sgt. J. Douglas, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Greenlaw)
Sgt. H. Driver, West Riding Regiment (Bingley)
Sgt. A. W. Duffield, Royal Garrison Artillery (Middlesbrough)
Pte. D1 Duncan, Royal Scots Fusiliers (Kilmarnock)
Cpl. F. Duncan, Royal Engineers (Tayport, Fife)
Battery Sergeant Major S. Eardley, Royal Garrison Artillery (Newcastle, Staffs.)
C.S. Maj. M. Earls, Welsh Regiment (Swansea)
Battery Sergeant Major F. W. Eastley, Royal Garrison Artillery (Southampton)
Cpl. O. J. Edwardes, Royal Engineers (Byfleet)
Battery Sergeant Major A. Elliott, Royal Field Artillery (Southampton)
L. Cpl. J. W. Elliott, Northumberland Fusiliers (Darlington)
Sgt. P. G. Elpiuck, Royal Sussex Regiment (Newick)
C.S. Maj. F. Emmott, Machine Gun Corps (Leeds)
L. Cpl. W. Etchells, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Sgt. A.H Evans, Welsh Guards (Marshfield, near Cardiff)
Mechanist Sergeant Major G. A. L. Evans, Army Service Corps (East London)
Sgt. H. V. Evans, West Yorkshire Regiment (Stoke, Staffs.)
Gnr. T. Evans, Royal Horse Artillery (Barnfurlong, near Wigan)
Act. Bombr. H. Eyre, Royal Field Artillery (Chesterfield)
Sgt. A. Falconer, Machine Gun Company (Walthamstow)
Battery Sergeant Major F. Farlie, Royal Horse Artillery (Plumstead)
Sgt. P. Fiarrell, Manchester Regiment (Huddersfield)
Sgt. G. Feast, South Wales Borderers (Eastney, Portsmouth)
Sgt. W. R. Feaver, Middlesex Regiment (Marden, Kent)
Spr. W. J. Feman, Royal Engineers (Liverpool)
C.S. Maj. A. Ferrier, Royal Highlanders (Perth)
Cpl. F. S. Fisher, Royal Field Artillery (Netley, Hamps.)
Sgt. J. Fletcher, Royal Garrison Artillery (Oxford)
C.S. Maj. R. Fletcher, Northumberland Fusiliers (Walker-on-Tyne)
Sgt. J. Flett, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Greenock)
Sgt. W. Flynn, Lancashire Fusiliers (Salford)
R.S. Maj. J. H. Foley, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Barmingham)
Cpl. C. Ford, Scottish Rifles (Hamilton)
Act. Cpl. F. Forster, Middlesex Regiment (Heaton Bark, Manchester)
Battery Sergeant Major J. W. Foster, Royal Field Artillery (Hull)
Sgt. G. Fowler, North Lancashire Regiment (Dartford, Kent)
Sgt. W. Fraser, Highland Light Infantry (Glasgow)
Pte. E. P. Freeman, Coldstream Guards (Goswell-road, London, EC)
Cpl. C. J. French, Royal Flying Corps (Watford, Herts.)
L. Cpl. R. H. Froude, Royal Engineers (Curraghmore, County Waterford)
Sgt. W. H. Fryer, Machine Gun Corps (Paddington)
Sgt. E. W. Fulford, Royal Engineers (Bedford)
L. Cpl. E. Gaddes, Lancashire Fusiliers (Longtown)
Sgt. J. Galvin, Royal Garrison Artillery (Cork)
Sgt. L. Galvin, West Riding Regiment (Marlborough)
Cpl. G. C. Ga,ne, Somerset Light Infantry (Shepton Mallet)
Cpl. A. Gardner, Royal Scots (Irlam o' th' Heights, Lancaster)
Siapr W. T. Garner, Royal Engineers (Blefaohley)
Sgt. P. Garrod, Royal Fusiliers (Stevenage)
Pte. J. Geoghan, Lancashire Fusiliers (E. West Hartlepool)
Sgt. F. Gibbs, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Birmingham)
Sgt. C. E. Gillott, Royal Engineers (Sheffield)
Sgt. W. Gilmore, Northumberland Fusiliers (Hull)
2nd Cpl. G. A. Glover, Royal Engineers (Paddington)
Sgt. F. Godley, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Whitwell, Derby)
Battery Sergeant Major P. F. Golding, Royal Garrison Artillery (Kensington)
Sgt. A. T. Goodey, South Staffordshire Regiment (Clapham Common, London)
Sgt. M. Goodwin, Lancashire Fusiliers (Winton Pairieroft)
Sgt. W. J. Goodwin, Rifle Brigade (Brightlingsea)
Sgt. E. Gordon, Royal Engineers (S.R) (Newton-le-Willows, Lancaster)
Cpl. J. Gorman, Royal Engineers (Liverpool)
Sgt. H. Gouldthorpe, Lincolnshire Regiment (Barton-on-Humber)
Pte. J. H. Govan, Scots Guards (Prestonkirk, E. Lothian)
Dvr. C. S. Gowing, Royal Garrison Artillery (Close, near Bristol)
Sgt. W. M. Graham, Royal Garrison Artillery (Peckham)
C.S. Maj. G. R. Graves, Machine Gun Company (Ashted, Birmingham)
Battery Sergeant Major P. E. Gray, Royal Field Artillery (Leicester)
Lance Seaman D. H. Green, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Falkirk)
Cpl. G. H. Green, Royal Field Artillery (Tideswell)
L. Sgt. E. Grey, Welsh Regiment (Swansea)
Sgt. R. A. B. Griffiths, Royal Garrison Artillery (Blackburn)
Sgt. S. Grover, Welsh Regiment (Poitslade)
C.S. Maj. H. R. Groves, East Lancashire Regiment (Poplar, London)
C.Q.M.S. H. Haigh, West Riding Regiment (Greetland, Yorkshire)
Pte. H. Haigh, West Riding Regiment (Lindley, Haddersfield)
Sadd. Staff Sergeant A. Hall, Royal Field Artillery (Brighton)
Sgt. A. E. Hall, Royal Garrison Artillery (Old Walsoken)
Sgt. E. Hall, Middlesex Regiment (Preston, Lancaster)
C.S. Maj. E. W. Hall, Machine Gun Corps (Norwich)
Cpl. L. Hall, West Riding Regiment Stalybridge)
Sgt. S. E. Hall, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Cockerham)
Ftr Cpl. P. Hampson, Royal Garrison Artillery (Birmingham)
C.S. Maj. R. Hanley, Rifle Brigade (Virginia Water)
Spr. J. Hannah, Royal Engineers (Clydeburgh)
C.Q.M.S. G. Hardie, Royal Engineers (Glasgow)
Gnr. C. Harding, Royal Field Artillery (Cardiff)
Gnr. E. Hardman, Royal Garrison Artillery (Waterfoot)
Sgt. P. Hardy, Royal Engineers (Durham)
Cpl. W. H. Harris, Royal Garrison Artillery (Grosvenorroad, London)
Spr. R. G. Harrison, Royal Engineers (Notting Hill)
Sgt. J. R. Harrop, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Worksop)
Battery Sergeant Major J. Hart, Royal Field Artillery (Hebburn)
C.Q.M.S. C. Hartley, West Yorkshire Regiment (Keighley)
Gnr. M. Hartley, Royal Garrison Artillery (Burnley)
Sgt. A. R. Hervey-Bathurst, Royal Flying Corps (London)
C.Q.M.S. S. M. Haydon, Royal West Kent Regiment (Sandwich)
Sgt. F. J. Haynes, Lancashire Fusiliers (Openshaw, Manchester)
Sgt. J. H. Heath, Middlesex Regiment (Hove, Brighton)
Battery Sergeant Major W. Heath Royal Garrison Artillery (Woodford, Essex)
C.S. Maj. J. Helhwell, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Pontefract)
Dvr. H. Henthorne, Royal Field Artillery (Oldham)
L. Cpl. W. J. Herring, King's Royal Rifle Corps (King's Cross, London)
Sgt. H. E. Hibbard, Honourable Artillery Company (Stoke Newington)
Pte. C. H. Hill, East Lancashire Regiment Barlowford, Nelson)
Sgt. W. Hill, North Staffordshire Regiment (Wooton, Staffs.)
C.S. Maj. F. Hillier, South Wales Borderers (Newport)
Act. Cpl. G. Hnidle (Preston)
C.S. Maj. A. G. Hiron, London Regiment (Limehouse, London)
Sgt. H. Hirst, West Riding Regiment (Batley)
Dvr. A. G. Hobbs, Royal Field Artillery (Birmingham)
B.Q.M. Sgt. A. Hodgson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Annfield Plain, County Durham)
Sgt. W. W. Hogben, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Portsmouth)
Sgt. J. Holbrook, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Sgt. F. Holliday, Royal Garrison Artillery (Cottingliam)
Act. Battery Sergeant Major Major E. Hollidge, Royal Field Artillery (Upper Tooting)
Sgt. A. E. Holmes, Royal Irish Rifles (Carrickfergus)
L. Cpl. B. Holmes, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Rugby)
Sgt. F. G. Holmes, Hussars (Candahar Barracks, Tidworth)
C.Q.M.S. F. Holt, Royal Engineers (Wmnick, Northants)
Sgt. J. Holton, Royal Irish Fusiliers (Clonaslea, Queens County)
Sgt. J. Hook, Durham Light Infantry (Durham)
Spr. J. W. Howarth, Royal Engineers (Bolton)
Battery Sergeant Major G. Howell, Royal Field Artillery (Blakeley)
C.S. Maj. W. Howes, Durham Light Infantry (Stockton, Durham)
Dvr. F. T. Howitt, Royal Field Artillery (Aberdeen)
Tmp R.S. Maj. R. A. Hoyle, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bury)
Pte. A. H. Hudson, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Coventry)
C.S. Maj. R. Hudson, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Normanton)
Pte. J. Hughes, RAMC (Manchester)
Sgt. T. Hughes, Royal Garrison Artillery (Sheerness, Kent)
Sgt. J. E. Humphreys, Royal Field Artillery (Tunstall, Staffs.)
Act. Sgt. G. W. Hunt, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Battery Sergeant Major J. Hunt, Royal Garrison Artillery (Higher Broughton, Manchester)
Spr. J. Hunt, Royal Engineers (High Wycombe)
L. Cpl. D. Hunter, Yorkshire Regiment (Bradford)
C.S. Maj. B. H. D. Hurst, Royal Engineers (Bath)
Sgt. E. Hutchms, Machine Gun Corps (Manchester)
Battery Sergeant Major J. C. Ihffe, Royal Garrison Artillery (Wakefield)
Act. C.S. Maj. E. Irving, Coldstream Guards (Walworth, London)
C.Q.M.S. G. Irving, Border Regiment (Waberthwaite)
C.Q.M.S. J. Jacks, Royal Munster Fusiliers (Leeds)
Sgt. J. J. Jackson, Yorkshire Regiment (Stockton-on-Tees)
C.S. Maj. T. Jackson, Machine Gun Corps (Birmingham)
L. Cpl. W. C. Jacobs, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Stow-on-the-Wold)
Pte. E. Jaoobson, Monmouthshire Regiment (Bristol)
C.S. Maj. G. Jaggs, Essex Regiment (Boxted, near Colchester)
C.S. Maj. A. Jenkins, Worcestershire Regiment (Worcester)
C.S. Maj. E. H. Johns, Royal Engineers (Norwich)
Sgt. E. A. Johnson, Royal Garrison Artillery (Walthamstow)
Cpl. F. W. Johnson, Royal Engineers (Mildmay Park, London)
Pte. T. Johnson, Rifle Brigade (Stockton)
Sgt. S. Johnstone, Scottish Rifles (Whiteinch)
Sgt. A. Jones, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Wrexham)
Sgt. A. Jones, Machine Gun Corps (Stoke-under-Ham)
L. Cpl. . G. Jones, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Plaistow)
L. Cpl. J. Jones, Manchester Regiment (Henfeod, S. Wales)
Cpl. J. P. Jones, Royal Garrison Artillery (Birmingham)
R.S. Maj. J. R. Jones MC Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Straff ord)
Spr. R. Jones, Royal Engineers (Merioneth)
Act. Staff Sergeant S. Jones, Army Ordnance Corps (Birmingham)
Cpl. T. Jones, West Yorkshire Regiment (Bradford)
Sgt. W. Jones, Machine Gun Corps (Bermondsey, London)
Sqn. S. M. H. Jordison (Northampton)
C.S. Maj. J. Joshua, Welsh Regiment (Maesteg
Sgt. J. W. Judd, Middlesex Regiment (Kingston-on-Thames)
C.S. Maj. H. Julsing, Northumberland Fusiliers (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
C.S. Maj. J. Kellock, Highland Light Infantry (Glasgow)
Pte. A. Kelly, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Pte. E. Kelly, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Fencehouses, Durham)
Sgt. J. Kelly, Royal Garrison Artillery (Cork)
Sgt. J. S. Kelly, Seaforth Highlanders (Springburn, Glasgow)
Sgt. H. Kendal, Royal Engineers (Bradford)
Sgt. A. Kendall, Royal Garrison Artillery (Brixton)
Battery Sergeant Major C. A. Kendall, Royal Field Artillery (Ilford)
Battery Sergeant Major J. Kennelly, Royal Garrison Artillery (Edinburgh)
Sgt. H. Kent, Royal Garrison Artillery (Malmesbury, Wiltshire)
Pte. A. Kerr, Royal Scots Fusiliers (E. Dumbarton)
Dvr. H. Kirby, Royal Field Artillery (Woodville Derby)
Cpl. H. S. Kirk, Highland Light Infantry (Whiteinch, Glasgow)
Battery Sergeant Major F. A. J. Knight, Royal Field Artillery (Bristol)
L. Cpl. J. W. Knight, Royal Engineers (Southampton)
Cpl. C. Knowles, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Victoria Park)
L. Cpl. W. Knowlson, West Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Q.M.S. W. Lamkin, RAMC (Ventnor, Isle of Wight)
Fitter Sergeant T. Lancaster, Royal Field Artillery (Workington, Cumberland)
Sgt. J. R. Lang, Shropshire Light Infantry (Edgwareroad, London)
C.S. Maj. E. Langley, Lancashire Fusiliers (Chadderton)
C.Q.M.S. W. T. Large, Cheshire Regiment (Northwich)
C.S. Maj. H. Larkman (Norwich)
C.S. Maj. A. Laurence, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (E. Derby)
L. Cpl. L. C. G. T. Lawford, Mil. Police (Keyhaven, near Lymington, Hampshire)
Spr. R. Lawson, Royal Engineers (Glasgow)
R.S. Maj. O. Lead, North Staffordshire Regiment (Wolstanton, Staffs.)
Sgt. J. W. Leamon, Hampshire Regiment (Woolwich)
Sgt. E. Ledgard, West Yorkshire Regiment (York)
Sgt. S. G. Lee, West Riding Regiment (Marsh, Huddersfield)
Q.M.S. R. G. Leggett, RAMC (Aldershot)
L. Cpl. M. Lennard, Northumberland Fusiliers (Burnhope Co Durham)
Pte. W. Lennon, Lancashire Fusiliers (Piestwick)
Pte. J. Leverton, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (St. Columb, Cornwall)
Pte. J. Lifford, Liverpool Regiment (Fulham)
Sgt. E. Lilley, King's Royal Rifle Corps (New Nuttall, Nottinghamshire)
Sgt. J. S. Lindsay, Army Cyclist Corps (Auchenairn, Bishopbriggs)
Sgt. A. P. Lincoln, Royal Field Artillery (Greater Yarmouth)
Pte. W. C. T. Lloyd, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Holywell)
R.S. Maj. G. Lockie, South Wales Borderers (Farringdon Rd., London)
Sgt. E. E. Loosemore, Royal Engineers (Bournemouth)
Sgt. J. F. Love, Royal Field Artillery (Parkstone, Dorset)
Cpl. C. E. Lowe, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Barkingside, London)
Cpl. A. G. Ludlow, Royal Fusiliers (Tottenham)
Bombr. W. G. Mabbutt, Headquarters, Royal Field Artillery (Shipston-on-Stour)
Act. Sgt. A. Macaulay, Machine Gun Company (Peith)
Pte. C. E. V. Macdonald, Cavalry S.R. (Fort Rose, Ross-shire)
C.S. Maj. B. Maddock, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Repton, Derby.)
Sgt. A. Macdonald, Seaforth Highlanders (Alness)
C.S. Maj. W. Hackerell, Royal Engineers (Norwich)
Sgt. W. R. MacQueen, Machine Gun Corps (E. London)
Sgt. G. W. Marriott, Royal Field Artillery (Homerton, London)
Sgt. E. Marritt, East Yorkshire Regiment (Hull)
Sgt. H. G. Marsh, Royal West Kent Regiment (Deal)
Act. B.Q.M. Sgt. D. Marshall, Royal Field Artillery (Blackpool)
Sgt. L. T. Marson, Military Mounted Police (Biggleswade, Bedford)
Sgt. J. Martin, Royal Field Artillery (Streatham Hill)
C.S. Maj. J. Martin, Lancashire Fusiliers (Manchester)
Cpl. T. Martin, Royal Engineers (West Hartlepool)
R.S. Maj. B. H. Mathews, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Cambridge)
Gnr. T. C. Matthews, Royal Horse Artillery
Sgt. J. H. Mason, Royal Garrison Artillery (Birkenhead)
Sgt. W. E. Mawbey, Machine Gun Corps (Pimlico, London)
Cpl. R. May, Manchester Regiment
Fitter Sergeant R. Maynard, Royal Field Artillery (Camborne, Cornwall)
C.S. Maj. S. Mayers, Machine Gun Corps (Newport, Isle of Wight)
Sgt. P. McAleavey, Royal Field Artillery (Cleator Moor, Whitehaven)
Cpl. J. McAllister, Royal Engineers (Stirlingshire)
Sgt. D. McAlpine, Highland Light Infantry (Partick/Glasgow)
Pte. F. McCann, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Hammersmith)
Sgt. J. McCarthy, Leinster Regiment (Cork)
Sgt. T. McClure, Royal Garrison Artillery (Thornastown, County Kilkenny)
C.S. Maj. A. A. McDonald, Royal Engineers (Highams Park)
C.S. Maj. J. McDonald, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Argyllshire)
L. Cpl. H. McCann, Royal Engineers (Glasgow)
Pte. J. McEwan, Gordon Highlanders (Dumfries)
Sgt. D. A. McFarlane, Welsh Regiment (Canada)
R.S. Maj. E. McGarry, Lancashire Fusiliers (Oldham)
Act. Bdr E. McGinms, Royal Field Artillery (Springburn, Glasgow)
Sgt. O. McGuinness, Irish Guards (Edgwareroad, London)
Sgt. S. McInnes, Royal Engineers (Thomaby)
C.S. Maj. J. McIntosh, Highland Light Infantry (Newton Grange)
Sgt. S. McIntyre, Royal Garrison Artillery (Millport)
Sgt. W. McKeown, Machine Gun Corps (Glasgow)
Sgt. J. McKintosh, Gordon Highlanders (Aberdeen)
R.S. Maj. J. McLean, Royal Scots Fusiliers (Aberdeen)
Sgt. T. McLeod, Northumberland Fusiliers (Achington)
Sgt. E. McNary, Royal Field Artillery (Wexford)
Staff Sergeant T. McNicol, RAMC (Derby)
Battery Sergeant Major H. Meathrel, Royal Horse Artillery (Devon)
Battery Sergeant Major G. Menzies, Royal Garrison Artillery (Dumbarton)
B.Q.M. Sgt. F. J. Mersh, Hatnps. R. Anerley, London)
Sgt. E. Miles, Royal Engineers (Pontyffym)
C.S. Maj. S. Mills, Worcestershire Regiment (Dudley)
Sgt. C. R. Milton, Scottish Rifles (Ramsgate)
C.S. Maj. R. M. Mitchell, Royal Highlanders (Perth)
Sgt. W. Mitchell, Cameron Highlanders (Taynuilt, Argyll)
Sgt. F. Moles, Machine Gun Corps (New Southgate, London)
Sgt. J. Moody, Machine Gun Corps (Newcastle)
Sgt. J. H. Moody, Rifle Brigade (Rochdale)
Sgt. J. Mooney, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Johnstone)
Sgt. A. T. Moore, Essex Regiment (Leyton)
Pte. F. Moore, Royal Dublin Fusiliers
Cpl. J. Moran, RAMC (Longsight, Manchester)
Cpl. J. F. Morgan, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. E. Morris, Lancashire Fusiliers (Higher Ince, Wigan)
Sgt. S. Morris, Royal Engineers (Stafford)
C.S. Maj. G. Moss, Manchester Regiment (Leigh)
Sgt. J. E. Moss, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Cpl. W. G. Mould, Lancers (Aberaman)
Sgt. W. J. Mulrooney, Royal Engineers (Stoke-on-Trent)
Gnr. F. Munday, Royal Garrison Artillery (Woking)
Battery Sergeant Major J. Munn, Royal Garrison Artillery (Southend)
B.Q.M. Sgt. Major P. S. Munro, Seaforth Highlanders (Edinburgh)
C.S. Maj. F. G. Murphy, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bury)
C.S. Maj. G. Murphy, Labour Corps (Birmingham)
Spr. A. J. Murray, Royal Engineers (Bristol)
Sgt. J. L. Murray, Royal Engineers (Chelsea)
C.S. Maj. H. J. S. Neate, Royal Engineers (Southsea)
Sgt. E. G. Newman, Royal Field Artillery (Boio Green, Kent)
C.S. Maj. T. P. Newman, Royal West Surrey Regiment
C.S. Maj. M. Newton, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Broughton-in-Furness)
C.S. Maj. J. Nicholson, Royal Irish Rifles (Carrickfergus)
Sgt. A. Nickson, North Lancashire Regiment (Preston, Lancaster)
C.S. Maj. J. Norns, Hampshire Regiment (Martyr Worthy, near Winchester)
C.S. Maj. J. O'Brien, Royal Fusiliers (Moirtlake)
Pte. J. Odell, Seaforth Highlanders (Amptjnll)
C.S. Maj. A. O'Nious, South Lancashire Regiment (Douglas, Isle of Man)
Sgt. B. St. C. Owen, Royal Engineers (Bristol)
C.S. Maj. G. Owens, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Wrexham)
Act. Staff Sergeant H. Owen, Army Ordnance Corps (Bolton)
C.S. Maj. C. E. W. Parish, Machine Gun Corps (Brecon)
Battery Sergeant Major A. Parker, Royal Field Artillery (Clonmel)
C.S. Maj. W. B. Parker, Durham Light Infantry (Bishopwearmouth)
Sgt. W. W. Pass, East Kent Regiment (Darlaston, Staffs.)
C.S. Maj. J. B. Pearce, Royal Engineers (Ilford)
Pte. P. Pearson, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Dublin)
Sgt. E. Pegg, North Staffordshire Regiment (Fenton, Staffs.)
C.Q.M.S. L. Pegg, Lancashire Fusiliers (Salford)
Pte. H. R. Penan, Machine Gun Corps (Romford, London)
Sgt. W. G. Perkins, Royal Field Artillery (Bristol)
Tmp Staff Sergeant Major J. Peiks, Army Service Corps (Henley-n-Arden)
Cpl. S. Petty, Royal Engineers (Hanogale)
Sgt. J. Phillips, Northumberland Fusiliers (Seaton DeLaval)
Bombr. P. W. Phillips, Royal Garrison Artillery (Walton, Radnorshire)
Cpl. H. O. Pike, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Manchester)
Sgt. W. Pilkington, East Lancashire Regiment (Accrington)
Sgt. H. Pinder, Royal Engineers (Darwen)
C.S. Maj. E. Pink, Essex Regiment (Enfield)
C.S. Maj. C. B. Plenderleith, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
L. Cpl. P. Pocock, Military Mounted Police (Edenbridge, Kent)
B.Q.M. Sgt. J. H. Poste, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Sgt. H. W. Potter, Manchester Regiment (Fliston)
L. Sgt. J. TPotter, South Lancashire Regiment (St. Helens)
R.S. Maj. W. J. Potter, Manchester Regiment (E. Woolwich)
Sgt. A. Price, Royal Garrison Artillery (Caversham, Oxon.)
Sgt. J. Price, South Lancashire Regiment (Warrington)
Sgt. W. Price, RAMC (Brookend, Glouc.)
Cpl. E. Proctor, Liverpool Regiment (Milnthorpe)
C.S. Maj. Puchas, South Staffordshire Regiment (Brownhills, near Walsall)
C.S. Maj. H. Pugh, Liverpool Regiment (Sandhurst, Cheshire)
R.S. Maj. G. Pullan, Northumberland Fusiliers (Farnley)
2nd Cpl. C. Purdy, Royal Engineers (Langley Hill, Derby)
Battery Sergeant Major W. J. Pye, Royal Field Artillery (Colchester)
Sgt. J. Rands, Royal Field Artillery (Sheffield)
Gnr. A. H. Rankin, Royal Garrison Artillery (Thornhill)
Sgt. W. Banner, Essex Regiment (Southend)
B.Q.M. Sgt. C. Ratcliffe, Royal Field Artillery (Leek, Staffs.)
Pte. W. J. Rawlings, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (St. Austell)
Cpl. F. Read, Royal Engineers (Chippenham)
B.Q.M. Sgt. A. H. Reed, Royal Field Artillery (Lowe-Clapton, London)
Sgt. J. Reeves, Royal Garrison Artillery (Brixton, London)
Sgt. W. Revell, Leicestershire Regiment (Bavenstone, Leics.)
C.S. Maj. W. H. Ricketts, South Wales Borderers (Pontypool)
Bin. A. Richards, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Southampton)
Sgt. D. Richards, Labour Corps (Egremont)
Sgt. W. J. Richards, North Staffordshire Regiment (Rugeley)
Sgt. A. Richardson, Coldstream Guards (Birmingham)
C.S. Maj. C. W. Richardson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Newcastle)
Sgt. G. Richardson, Machine Gun Corps (Ipswich)
Sgt. H. Rider, Royal Field Artillery (Sheffield)
Sgt. S. L. Ridgway, West Riding Regiment (Hadfield, Glossop)
Sgt. G. W. Ridyard, Lancashire Fusiliers (Hightown)
Battery Sergeant Major A. Rimmer, Royal Field Artillery (St. Helens)
Sgt. A. Roberts, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Sheffield)
Sgt. J. Roberts, Monmouthshire Regiment (Talywain, Poratypool, Mon.)
C.S. Maj. W. J. Roberts, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Sgt. D. Robertson, Tank Corps (Aberfeldy)
Sgt. W. E. Robertson, Royal Marine Field Artillery (Carlisle)
Act. C.S. Maj. F. Robinson Tank Corps (Bridlington)
Sgt. T. Robinson, Durham Light Infantry (Durham)
Rfn. A. Roe, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Balderton, Newark)
2nd Cpl. J. Rogers, Royal Engineers (Todmorden)
Cpl. S. Rogers, Royal Field Artillery (Wealdstone)
Sgt. H. Rollinson, South Staffordshire Regiment (Bilston, Staffs.)
Sgt. E. A. Rose, Royal Engineers (Thornton Heath)
C.S. Maj. R. Rowan, Highland Light Infantry (Glasgow)
Cpl. W. Rowe, Mil Mounted Police (Castleford, Yorkshire)
Gnr. F. H. Rundle, Royal Garrison Artillery (Plymouth)
Sgt. S. Russell, East Yorkshire Regiment (Elloughton, near Brough, Yorkshire)
C.Q.M.S. S. Salmon, Monmouthshire Regiment (Hammersmith)
Gnr. J. J. Salkeld, Royal Garrison Artillery (Cockermouth)
B.Q.M. Sgt. G. Samson, Worcestershire Regiment (Worcester)
C.S. Maj. F. Sanditson, Royal Fusiliers (Twickenham)
C.S. Maj. A. H. Sands, Royal Marine Light Infantry (Storehouse, Plymouth)
Cpl. J. W. Savage, Royal Engineers (Birmingham)
Cpl. J. W. Savin, Royal Field Artillery (Sedgley, near Dudley)
L. Cpl. J. Scott, Royal Engineers (Liverpool)
C.S. Maj. R. Scott, Middlesex Regiment (Stroud Green, London)
Sgt. H. Scrimshaw, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Mansfield)
C.Q.M.S. M. A. Searle, Highland Light Infantry (Worrnit, Fifeshire)
C.S. Maj., S. Searle, South Wales Borderers (Peckham, London)
Cpl. E. Seed, Lancashire Fusiliers (Blackburn)
Sgt. J. Seton, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Glasgow)
Sgt. C. J. Shale, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Coventry)
Cpl. Shoeing-Smith J. Sharp, Royal Field Artillery (Kilmarnock)
Sgt. H. Shaw, Royal Engineers (Musselburgh)
Fitter J. A. Shearer, Royal Field Artillery (Glasgow)
Sgt. F. J. Sheldon, Royal Garrison Artillery (Croydon)
Sgt. J. Shimmings, Coldstream Guards (Holsworthy, Devon.)
Petty Officer H. J. Simon, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Hurst, Bixley)
Pte. W. Simpson, Northumberland Fusiliers (West Sleekburn, Bedlington)
B.Q.M. Sgt. R. Sinclair, Royal Garrison Artillery (Leith)
Cpl. H. Singleton, Royal Horse Artillery (Manchester)
Gnr. J. J. R. Singleton, Royal Garrison Artillery (Manchester)
Cpl. S. C. Sircombe, Royal Engineers (Bristol)
Pte. G. Slater, Dragoon Guards (Wmsford)
C.S. Maj. T. W. Slater, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Matlock, Bath)
Spr. P. A. Sly, Royal Engineers (Sheale)
Sgt. Major H. Smart, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Worcestershire)
Cpl. A. G. Smith, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Sgt. A. S. Smith, Royal Field Artillery (Notting Hill Gate)
R.S. Maj. G. F. W. Smith, Dragoon Guards (Battersea)
Cpl. J. H. Smith, Royal Engineers (Peterborough)
Bombr. L. E. Smith, Royal Garrison Artillery (Hanworth)
Act. Cpl. R. Smith, Royal Scots (Armadale)
C.S. Maj. W. Smith, Gordon Highlanders (Clydebank, Glasgow)
Cpl. W. Smith, Royal Engineers (Newport, Mon.)
Sgt. J. V. Solari, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Sgt. A. Speake, Welsh Regiment (Trealaw)
C.S. Maj. C. Spence, West Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Cpl. C. Spivey, Yorkshire Regiment (Pocklington)
Sgt. E. J. Spriggs, Royal Engineers (Burnham, Somerset)
C.S. Maj. S. Sole, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
Battery Sergeant Major N. F. Spratley, Royal Garrison Artillery (Paddington, London)
Battery Sergeant Major A. Sprott, Royal Field Artillery (Glasgow)
Bombr. W. E. Stay, Royal Garrison Artillery (Rugby)
Sgt. L. Stewart, Royal Field Artillery (Stony Stratford)
Gnr. D. B. Stirling, Machine Gun Corps (Arclgour Wish aw)
2nd Cpl. C. M. Stone, Royal Engineers (Seaford)
C.Q.M.S. R. V. Stone, Royal Engineers (Birmingham)
C.S. Maj. T. A. Stuart, Lincolnshire Regiment (Ashton-under-Lyne)
Cpl. J. Swift, Machine Gun Corps (Wimbledon, Liondon)
L. Cpl. H. Sykes, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Batley)
C.S. Maj. T. Sykes, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Leeds)
Sgt. C. R. Taylor, Royal Garrison Artillery (Highgate Road)
C.Q.M.S. T. Templeton, Royal Engineers (Glengarnock, Ayr)
C.S. Maj. F. A. Terrill, Royal Engineers (Wealds)
Sgt. H. W. Terry, Royal West Kent Regiment (Sevenoaks)
C.S. Maj. W. R. Thomas, Scottish Rifles (Battersea)
Cpl. H. Thompson, Royal Garrison Artillery (Liverpool)
B.Q.M. Sgt.A. C. Thorpe, Royal Field Artillery (Petersfield)
Cpl. C. V. Tighe, Middlesex Regiment (Walthamstow, Essex)
Sgt. W. Timility, Lancashire Fusiliers (Seedley Manchester)
Pte. C. E. Torr, West Yorkshire Regiment (Rotherham)
C.S. Maj. J. R. Tose, West Yorkshire Regiment (York)
B.Q.M. Sgt. P. W. Tranter, Royal Field Artillery (Carlow)
Cpl. A. Travi, Middlesex Regiment (Islington)
Sgt. P. W. Treacher, Royal Garrison Artillery (New-Maiden)
Pte. T. H. Tregunna, Welsh Regiment (Swansea)
Sgt. W. H. Trim, Royal Garrison Artillery (Lambeth)
Sgt. W. G. Trindef, Royal Berkshire Regiment (Windsor)
Sgt. H. Troke, Royal Engineers (Bournemouth)
Sgt. J. W. Trotter, Durham Light Infantry (Durham)
Sgt. F. H. TVyman, North Staffordshire Regiment (Abergavenny)
R.S. Maj. T. G. Upton, Hussars (Preston, Lancaster)
Sgt. A. Utton, East Yorkshire Regiment (Hull)
Sgt. G. Veitch, Machine Gun Corps (Edinburgh)
Sgt. H. C. Vmer, Somerset Light Infantry (London)
Act. Colour Sergeant G. Vyse, East Yorkshire Regiment
Cpl. -Sergeant A. Waddell, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Bothkennar, Stirlingshire)
Gnr. M. J. Wagner, Royal Field Artillery (Liverpool)
C.S. Maj. C. F. Walker, Bedfordshire Regiment (Hitchin)
C.S. Maj. J. Wallis, Lincolnshire Regiment (Grimsby)
Sgt. G. Walmesley, Machine Gun Corps (Bradford)
Sgt. J. Wareing, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Cpl. E. J.Warwick, Royal Engineers (Pontycymmer)
Sgt. J. A. Wassell, Royal Engineers (Fareham, Hampshire)
Sgt. J. Waters, Northumberland Fusiliers (Gosforth)
Pte. G. Watson, Scots Guards (Kirkonhill-by-Montrose)
Sgt. W. Watson, Highland Light Infantry (Dundee)
Sgt. F. W. Watt, Tank Corps (Aberdeen)
L. Cpl. H. Watts, Traffic Control Squadron (Dovercourt, Essex)
L. Cpl. P. Wearn, Wiltshire Regiment (Brockenhurst, Hampshire)
Cpl. G. Webster, South Lancashire Regiment (St. Helens)
Sgt. W. Webster, Royal Engineers (Ashby-de-la-Zouch)
C.S. Maj. H. Weedon, Royal Fusiliers (Homerton)
Cpl. H. F. Welfare, Northumberland Fusiliers (Newcastle)
L. Cpl. W. J. Welham, East Lancashire Regiment (Willesden, London)
2nd Cpl. W. Wells, Royal Engineers (Alford, Surrey)
Sgt. A. G. Wenden, Royal Garrison Artillery (Kingston, Portsmouth)
Sgt. G. White, Royal Field Artillery (Liverpool)
Sgt. H. Whitmore, Royal Garrison Artillery (W. Hampstead)
Sgt. H. A. White, Tank Corps (Reading)
Sgt. H. Whitfield, Yorkshire Regiment (Sledmere)
Air Mechanic Sergeant Major F. Whittaker, Tank Corps (Manchester)
Sgt. F. Whittaker, Royal Field Artillery (Sowerby Bridge, Yorkshire)
Sgt. T. Whitton, Machine Gun Corps (Edinburgh)
C.S. Maj. J. Wicken, Royal West Kent Regiment (North Woolwich)
Sgt. H. G. Wickington, East Kent Regiment (Haggerston, London)
Sgt. P. Wicks, Royal Horse Artillery (Wellhall, London)
Cpl. A. Widdowson, Royal Field Artillery (E. Wakefield)
Sgt. L. C. Wildig, Royal Field Artillery (Bethnal Green, London)
R.S. Maj. A. Wileman, North Lancashire Regiment
Sgt. J. Wilkinson, East Lancashire Regiment (Burnley)
C.S. Maj. W. S. Wilkinson, West Riding Regiment (Holmfirth, Huddersfield)
C.S. Maj. E. G.Williams, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Brixton)
Cpl. F. Williams, North Lancashire Regiment (Horwich)
L. Cpl. F. Williams, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
L. Sgt. I. Williams, Welsh Regiment (Bridgend)
C.Q.M.S. P. Williams, Royal Munster Fusiliers (Abertndwr)
Cpl. S. A. Williams, Royal Engineers (Smethwick)
Sgt. W. T. Williams, Middlesex Regiment (Hornsey, London)
L. Cpl. H. Willicombe, Rifle Brigade (Camberwell)
Dvr. A. A. Willis, Royal Garrison Artillery (Apperley, near Tewkesbury)
B.Q.M. Sgt. J. Willis, Royal Garrison Artillery (Kensington)
Sgt. H. Willmer, Royal Garrison Artillery (Homerton, London)
Sgt. W. Willows, West Riding Regiment (Colne)
L. Sgt. H. Wilshaw, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Chapel-en-le-Frith)
Sgt. A. P. Wilson, Bedfordshire Regiment (Luton)
R.S. Maj. J. W. Windmill, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Brierley Hill)
Cpl. H. Withers, Royal Field Artillery (Muswell Hill, London)
Sgt. A. Wood, Essex Regiment (Warley)
Cpl. H. Wood, Royal Field Artillery
C.S. Maj. H. C. Woodger, East Lancashire Regiment (Banning, Kent)
Sgt. H. Woodhams, East Kent Regiment (Northampton)
Battery Sergeant Major E. Woodruff, Royal Field Artillery (Blackburn)
Cpl. F. Woode, Royal Engineers (Maidenhead, Bucks)
Battery Sergeant Major J. H. Woods, Royal Field Artillery (Battersea)
Sgt. C. E. K. Wordingham, Suffolk Regiment (Railway, Cambs)
Fitter Q.M.S. J. W.Worth, Royal Field Artillery (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Sgt. F. E. Wright, Royal Engineers (Darlington)
Cpl. F. W. Wright, Royal Scots (Edinburgh)
Sgt. W. J. Wright, Royal Field Artillery (Pembroke)
C.S. Maj. T. G. Yearsley, Monmouthshire Regiment (Aberearn, Mon.)
Sgt. W. H. Zanazi, Royal Engineers (Plymouth)
Sgt. J. R. Adamson, Yorkshire Regiment (East Rainton)
Petty Officer J. Allan, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Annitsford)
Act. Bombr. S. A. Blyth, Royal Garrison Artillery (Melton, Norfolk)
2nd Cpl. F. Bownas, Royal Engineers (E. Bradford)
L. Cpl. L. J. Burden, Tank Corps (Bridgtown)
Sgt. A. Cole, South Wales Borderers (Withington Station, near Hereford)
L. Cpl. M. Dixon, Shropshire Light Infantry (Gelli, Rhondda)
Battery Sergeant Major F. W. H. Eastley, Royal Garrison Artillery (Southampton)
Spr. W. J. Feeman, Royal Engineers (Liverpool)
R.S. Maj. A. Ferrier, Royal Highlanders (Perth)
Cpl. F. Fisher, Royal Field Artillery Wetley, Hampshire)
Cpl. G. C. Gane, Somerset Light Infantry (Shepton Mallet)
Spr. W. I. Garner, Royal Engineers (Bletchley)
C.S. Maj. E. Hall, Middlesex Regiment (Preston, Lancaster)
L. Cpl. G. Hardie, Royal Engineers (Glasgow)
Spr. R. Harrison, Royal Engineers (Notting Hill)
Sgt. R. Harrop, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Worksop)
Dvr. H. Henthorn, Royal Field Artillery (Oldham)
Cpl. G. Hindle, East Lancashire Regiment (Preston)
L. Sgt. W. W. Hogben, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Portsmouth)
C.S. Maj. E. Irving, Coldstream Guards (Walworth, London)
C.Q.M.S. I. Jacks, Royal Munster Fusiliers (Leeds)
Act. Cpl. F. G. Jones, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Plaistow)
C.S. Maj. H. Larkman, Essex Regiment (Norwich)
Sgt. L. T. Marsom, Military Mounted Police (Biggleswade, Bedford)
Sgt. J. McIntosh, Gordon Highlanders (Aberdeen)
Sgt. S. S. Morris, Royal Engineers (Stafford)
Pte. H. R. Periam, Machine Gun Corps (Romford, London)
Sgt. A. Roberts, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Talywain, Pontypool, Mon.)
L. Cpl. I. Scott, Royal Engineers (Liverpool)
Sgt. J. V. Solari, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps
Battery Sergeant Major H. F. Spratley, Royal Garrison Artillery (Paddington, London)
R.S. Maj. A. Utton, East Yorkshire Regiment (Hull)
Clr.Sergeant G. Vyse, East Yorkshire Regiment
C.S. Maj. C. F. Walker, Bedfordshire Regiment (Hitchin)
C.Q.M.S. H. G. Wickington, East Kent Regiment (Haggerston, London)
Sgt. P. J. Wicks, Royal Horse Artillery (Wellhall, London)
L. Cpl. F. E. Wright, Royal Engineers (Darlington)
Australian Imperial Force
Pte. A. J. Breen, Infantry
Tmp Cpl. B. W. Rickwo, Infantry
E. H. Wiber, T.M. Brigade
Sgt. E. A. W. Adams, Infantry
C.S. Maj. A. E. Adams, Infantry
Sgt. V. J. Barkell, Infantry
Spr. E. L. Barrett, Engineers
Pte. T. Bayne, Infantry
Pte. H. Beaird, Infantry
Sgt. D. F. Berman, Infantry
V. Berriman, Artillery
Cpl. L. Berry, Infantry
Sgt. J. R. Birthisel, Infantry
Pte. S. H. Brazil, Infantry
Pte. J. A. Breen, Infantry
Gnr. D. G. Brough, Field Artillery
Sgt. J. R. Butler, Infantry
Sgt. R. A. F. Campbell, Infantry
C.S. Maj. H. M. Cook, Infantry
Cpl. H. F. Eagle, Field Artillery
Sgt. A. W. Farmer, Infantry
Sgt. R. P. Farris, Infantry
Cpl. A. Flavell, Infantry
Sgt. S. Fountain, Engineers
Sgt. C. E. Free, Infantry
R.S. Maj. R. Gray, Infantry
Sgt. L. G. Howe, Engineers
Sgt. L. G. Jarvis, Infantry
Sgt. J. H. Leach, Infantry
2nd Cpl. L. T. J. Marshall, Engineers
Sgt. Major A. E. McDonald, Field Artillery
Staff Sergeant A. V. D. Moody, Engineers
2nd Cpl. J. L. Mounsey, Eng
Sgt. B. F. Murphy, Infantry
Sgt. D. T. W. Neville, Infantry
L. Cpl. F. J. Perry, Infantry
Cpl. J. Printer, Salvage Company
Cpl. T. G. Purdue, Gar. Artillery
L. Cpl. J. Reilly, Infantry
Bombr. W. H. Ramsden, Field Artillery
Tmp Cpl. W. B. Rickwood, Infantry
Sgt. H. Shatwell, Infantry
Pte. T. Smith, Infantry
Sgt. G. Taylor, Pioneer Battalion
Spr. R. G. Thomas, Engineers
Sgt. F. T. Trevaskis, Pioneer Battalion
R.S. Maj. A. J. Vallis, Infantry
C.Q.M.S. F. Walker, Machine Gun Corps
Cpl. C. G. Watson, Infantry
L. Sgt. F. A. Wheaton, Infantry
Cpl. H. E. Wiber, T. M. Brigade
Pte. J. D. Walks, Army Medical Corps
C.S. Maj. S. Wilson, Infantry
Canadian Force
Sgt. P. H. Law, Field Artillery
C.S. Maj. H. Adam, Infantry
Cpl. J. D. Aird, Mounted Rifles
C.S. Maj. C. Baker, Infantry
Sgt. W. J. Bassey, Infantry
Sgt. H. M. Bennett, Engineers
C.S. Maj. R. Blair, Infantry
C.S. Maj. F. J. Bonner, Infantry
Sgt. E. J. Bridgwater, Engineers
Cpl. J. Bullock, Infantry
Sgt. J. Burns, Infantry
C.S. Maj. H. T. Carter, Infantry
Sgt. C. L. Cooling, Engineers
Sgt. J. Craig, Engineers
R.S. Maj. R. Dalrymple, Infantry
Bombr. F. Donald, Gar. Artillery
Sgt. T. A. Dunseath, Infantry
Act. C.S. Maj. G. W. Durran, Infantry
Sgt. E. Ensor, Infantry
C.S. Maj. E. Evans, Infantry
Battery Sergeant Major S. C. Evans, Artillery
Sgt. E. J. Field, Infantry
Sgt. A. H. Frame, Field Artillery
Sgt. J. Goulding, Railway Troops
Pte. J. H. Gulliver, Infantry
Sgt. J. M. Hay, Machine Gun Corps
Spr. J. W. Holmes, Engineers
C.S. Maj. G. L. Howard, Mounted Rifles
R.S. Maj. W. T. Johnson, Infantry
B.Q.M. Sgt. D. McN. Johnstone, Infantry
Sgt. A. J. Kirouac, Infantry
Act. Sgt. H. W. Langdon, Infantry
Sgt. P. H. Law, Field Artillery
Sgt. J. N. Lyons, Gar. Artillery
C.S. Maj. A. MacAlay, Infantry
Battalion Scout Sergeant J. L. MacCoubrey, Mounted Rifles
L. Cpl. J. Mackay, Infantry
Battery Sergeant Major A. K. McDonald, Field Artillery
Sgt. W. L. McLean, Mounted Rifles
Sgt. D. McLellan, Pioneer Battalion
L. Cpl. W. J. Mead, Mounted Rifles
T. P. Melvin, Field Artillery
Sgt. W. A. Millen, Infantry
Cpl. H. L. Montgomery, Cyclist Battalion
Sgt. T. W. Morgan, Infantry
Pte. W. R. Mowll, Infantry
C.S. Maj. J. Mutimer, Infantry
Sgt. C. H. Olson, Railway Troops
C.S. Maj. J. H. Patton, Machine Gun Corps
Sgt. W. L. Paul, Infantry
Cpl. C. E. Penrod, Field Artillery
Sgt. A. Powell, Engineers
C.S. Maj. D. M. Robinson, Infantry
C.S. Maj. J. Shefly, Inf
Sgt. Warrant Officer Simpson, Engineers
Sgt. W. D. Street, Infantry
Pte. R. Taylor, Machine Gun Corps
Sgt. Major J. Turner, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. J. A. Ware, Gar. Artillery
Sgt. J. Watson, Army Medical Corps
C.S. Maj. J. H. Wyatt, Infantry
Sgt. G. M. Young, Infantry
New Zealand Force
Pte. N. D. Bowman, Infantry
Cpl. W. W. Bullock, Infantry
Pte. V. Cruickshank, Infantry
L. Sgt. J. Densem, Rifle Brigade
Gnr. A. S. Driver, Field Artillery
Sgt. F. Greig, Field Artillery
R.S. Maj. W. A. Gustafson, Pioneers
L. Sgt. S. N. Managh, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. J. McCreanor, Infantry
Cpl. K. McKenzie, Infantry
Sgt. A. W. M. Ohlson, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. H. W. Price, Machine Gun Corps
L. Cpl. orporal L. R. Ritchie, Infantry
Dvr. S. Wade, Field Artillery
Newfoundland Contingent
C.S. Maj. A. Taylor, Newfoundland Regiment
South African Force
Bombr. E. C. Tys, Royal Marine Artillery
Conspicuous Gallantry Medal (CGM)[edit]
Meritorious Service Medal (MSM)[edit]
Sister Eileen King, Queen Alexandra's Imperial Military Nursing Service (R.). For bravery and devotion to duty on the occasion of a hostile air raid on a casualty clearing station. Although wounded, she continued to give directions for the care of the wounded.
For gallantry in the performance of military duty 

Cpl. J. B. Leonard, Royal Irish Rifles
Sgt. W. H. Pollard, West Riding Regiment (Huddersfield)
Pte. H. B. Taylor, RAMC (Rochdale)
For valuable services rendered witih the Armies in the Field during the present War 

Act. Staff Sergeant J. T. Claireaux, Army Ordnance Corps (Edinburgh)
Act. Sgt. C. Pledger, Royal Garrison Artillery (Buntingford)
Staff Sergeant J. Acland, Army Service Corps (East Dulwich)
Sgt. H. Abbott, Grenadier Guards (Battersea)
Sgt. A. Adams, RAMC (Netley)
Army Staff Sergeant W. H. Ahl, Army Ordnance Corps (Fulham)
Pte. J. G. A. Aiston, Army Service Corps (Watford)
Staff Sergeant E. Alexander, RAMC (Jersey)
Sgt. F. Allan, Royal Fusiliers (London)
Cpl. J. L. Allen, Army Ordnance Corps (Fulham)
Sgt. C. A. Alp, Lincolnshire Regiment (Leyton)
Sgt. J. Anderson, Army Ordnance Corps (Sunderland)
Pte. W. E. Anderson, Hussars (Headington Quarry, Oxford)
L. Sgt. W. Archer, Labour Corps (Lincoln)
Sgt. R. Armstrong, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers (Irvinestown)
2nd Cpl. W. Armstrong, Royal Engineers (Hulme)
Cpl. A. Asher, Army Service Corps (Stoke Newington)
Sgt. J. H. Ashton, RAMC (Manchester)
Cpl. F. R. Ashwin, Royal Engineers (Old Brompton)
Sgt. N. Ashworth, RAMC (Bolton)
Sgt. T. Atherton, Royal Garrison Artillery (Burnley)
Sgt. W. J. Auker, Norfolk Regiment (King's Lynn)
Sgt. C. Austin, Royal West Kent Regiment (nr. Cardiff)
B.Q.M. Sgt. A. Axson, King's Own Scottish Borderers Dumfries)
B.Q.M. Sgt. F. Bailey, South Lancashire Regiment (Manchester)
Pte. A. L. Bale, Army Service Corps (Forest Gate)
2nd Cpl. W. A. Ballard, Royal Engineers (Southsea)
C.S. Maj. A. W. Bamber, Royal Engineers (Eastville)
Act. R.S. Maj. G. W. Banks, Middlesex Regiment (Staines)
C.S. Maj. G. T. Barber, Royal Engineers (Birmingham)
Cpl. J. E. Barber, Army Service Corps (Brighton)
Pte. E. H. Barfoot, Army Service Corps (New Cross)
Sgt. F. C. Barfoot, Royal Field Artillery (Portsmouth)
C.S. Maj. G. W. Barham, Royal Engineers (Leighton)
Pte. J. Barnard, Army Service Corps (jattleboro)
Battery Sergeant Major C. Barnes, Royal Garrison Artillery (Bristol)
Sgt. P. J. Barnes, Army Service Corps (Warwick)
L. Cpl. D. Barry, Military Mounted Police (Manchester)
Squadron Q.M.S. D. H. Bartlett, Army Service Corps (Roseberry Square, London)
Staff Sergeant J. G. Batten, RAMC (St. Helens)
Sgt. H. J. Baugh, Royal Garrison Artillery (Plymouth)
Sgt. C. Baughan, Army Service Corps (Bournemouth)
Cpl. W. R. Beale, Royal Engineers (York)
L. Cpl. R. H. Beaumont, Royal Engineers (Woking)
C.Q.M.S. A. J. Beckerleg, Army Service Corps (Willesden)
Sgt. Major D. J. D. Belford, RAMC (Dundee)
L. Cpl. D. Bell, Cameron Highlanders (Glasgow)
C.S. Maj. E. C. Bennett, Royal Engineers (Penzance)
9Staff Sergeant Major C. W. Bennett, Army Service Corps (Fishergate)
Sgt. F. Bennett, Royal Field Artillery (Bristol)
Sgt. F. T. G. Bennett, Royal Field Artillery (Woolwich)
By/Sergeant Major N. S. Bennett, Royal Garrison Artillery (Southsea)
Sgt. Major S. Bennett, Military Mounted Police (Hoddesdon)
C.Q.M.S. F. Benson, Army Service Corps (Ayr)
L. Cpl. R. H. Bentley, Royal Engineers (Leicester)
Sgt. W. J. Benton, Machine Gun Corps (Ilford)
Squadron Q.M.S. C. E. Berbridge, Army Service Corps (Fulham)
Sgt. W. H. Bernard, Royal Fusiliers (Custom House, London)
L. Cpl. V. L. Berrie, Royal Engineers (Tooting)
Sgt. J. Berry (Andover)
Pte. J. E. Bettoney, Army Service Corps (Leicester)
Pte. H. J. Bevan, Royal Army Veterinary Corps (St. Pauls Cray)
Sgt. G. O'H. Beveridge, Military Mounted Police (Rathmines)
Pte. F. C. Biggs, Army Service Corps (Westbourne Pk.)
Q.M.S. J. W. Birch, Army Service Corps (Leeds)
Battery Sergeant Major F. Bishop, Royal Field Artillery (Plumstead)
Sgt. W. F. Blackburn, Royal Engineers (York)
Troop Sergeant Major J. Blackburn, Royal Engineers (Blackburn)
Cpl. F. W. Blackmore, Army Service Corps (Woolton)
Spr. R. Blakemore, Royal Engineers (Walthamstow)
Tmp R.S. Maj. W. Blackwood, Middlesex Regiment (Stoke Gabriel, near Totnes)
Conductor L. A. Blake, Royal Marines (South Shields)
Pte. E. Blenkhorn, Army Service Corps (Roundhay)
Staff Sergeant R. Boddy, RAMC (Cardiff)
Sgt. G. A. Booker, Royal Flying Corps (Wembley)
S/Q.M.S.ergeant H. Bolton, Army Service Corps (Manchester)
Staff Sergeant Major S. A. Bone, Yeomanry (Titmarsh)
Squadron Q.M.S. S. F. Bonner, Army Service Corps (Colchester)
Sgt. W. Bostock, Yeomanry (Teignmouth)
Staff Sergeant W. R. Bougourd, Army Ordnance Corps (Canning Town)
Sgt. W. Boughey, Royal Garrison Artillery (Skegby)
Sgt. E. S. Bourton, RAMC (Brixton)
Sgt. J. Bovill, Army Service Corps (Leyton)
Sgt. Major Foreman of Works J. Boyd, Royal Engineers (Fulwood)
B.Q.M. Sgt. J. W. Boyle, Gordon Highlanders (Port Glasgow)
Mechanic Sergeant Major J. Bradburn, Army Service Corps (E. Preston)
Far. Q.M.S. I. Brayton, Army Service Corps (Aldershot)
Sgt. Major J. Brett, RAMC (Plumstead)
L. Cpl. J. Brew, Machine Gun Corps (Belfast)
C.Q.M.S. R. J. Brewer, Machine Gun Corps (Tottenham)
Sgt. S. J. Brewrn, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
L. Cpl. A. C. J. Bridges, Military Mounted Police (Tonbridge)
Pte. B. J. Brown, A.S.C. (Havant)
Battery Sergeant Major J. A. J. Brown, Royal Field Artillery (East Finchley)
Sgt. W. Brown, Royal Engineers (Edinburgh)
C.S. Maj. W. T. Brown, Army Service Corps (Hove)
Sgt. A. Buckingham, Royal Engineers (Plumstead)
Battery Sergeant Major F. J. Buckland, Royal Field Artillery (Exeter)
Q.M.S. A. Buckner, RAMC (Glasgow)
Conductor E. W. Buffee, Army Ordnance Corps (Whitley Bay)
R.S. Maj. T. H. Bull, Royal Field Artillery (E. Loughton)
Pte. P. A. Bullock, Army Service Corps (Forest Gate)
Staff Sergeant Major G. Bunch, Army Service Corps (Aldershot)
Regimental Q.M.S. C. Bundock, Northumberland Fusiliers (Wood Green, London)
R.S. Maj. F. Burdett, Dragoon Guards (Birkenhead)
Staff Sergeant C. H. Burghart, Army Service Corps (Ferryhill)
Cpl. T. G. Burnard, Army Service Corps (Seaton)
Battery Sergeant Major F. Burt, Royal Garrison Artillery (Easton)
Sgt. R. Burton, Royal Engineers (E. Berwick)
Sgt. R. Burton, North Staffordshire Regiment (Cheltenham)
Cpl. R. Burton, Cameron Highlanders (Livingstone Station)
Tmp R.S. Maj. T. Burton, R. FA. (Harrogate)
Far. Sergeant G. N. R. Buehnell, Royal Field Artillery (Notting Hill, London)
Cpl. O. L. Butler, Army Service Corps (Birkenhead)
C.S. Maj. A. Bycroft, Army Service Corps (Liverpool)
Cpl. E. W. F. Cager, Royal Engineers (Brighton)
C.S. Maj. W. E. Calcott, Royal Engineers (Harrow)
Sgt. A. S. Camfield, Army Service Corps (Hepburn-on-Tyne)
L. Cpl. E. W. A. Campbell, Middlesex Regiment (East Ham)
C.S. Maj. J. Campbell, Army Service Corps (Lurgan)
Cpl. W. H. Campbell Army Service Corps (Burnley)
Sgt. Major J. B. Cantrell, RAMC (Warrington)
Bombr. H. Carley, Royal Garrison Artillery (Dover)
C.S. Maj. S. H. Carman, Royal Engineers (Islington)
Sgt. W. Carroll, Manchester Regiment (Oldham)
Cpl. G. W. Carter, Royal Flying Corps (Swindon)
L. Cpl. H. Carter, Army Ordnance Corps (Gillingham)
Pte. E. L. Cartwright, RAMC (Birmingham)
Sgt. J. Carver, Royal Engineers (Gateshead)
Act. Staff Sergeant C. L. Caswell, Army Ordnance Corps, attd. 67th Siege Battery, Royal Garrison Artillery (Taunton)
Sgt. W. W. Cater, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Ossett)
Sgt. A. L. Chadwick, Royal Field Artillery (Long-sight)
L. Cpl. A. E. Chare, Royal Engineers (Sutton Coldfield)
Pte. H. Charles worth, London Regiment (Huddersfield)
Gnr. C. E. Chick, Royal Garrison Artillery (Sunderland)
Fitter Sergeant G. E. Chirgwin, Royal Flying Corps (Streatham)
Sgt. A. E. Chisnall, Royal Engineers (Hindley Green)
Act. C.S. Maj. W. Christie, Royal Engineers (E. Chatham)
Sgt. J. T. Churchyard, Royal Field Artillery (Strand, London)
Bombr. G. S. Clapp, Royal Garrison Artillery (Poplar)
Act. R.S. Maj. F. J. Clark, East Lancashire Regiment (Plumstead)
Spr. J. P. Clark, Royal Engineers (Denton)
Dvr. A. L. Clarke, Army Service Corps (Grantham)
Bombr. C. E. Clarke, Royal Garrison Artillery (Torquay)
Sgt. J. H. Clarke, Manchester Regiment (Altrincham)
Sgt. Major F. A. Clements, Mil Prov. S. Corps (Fulham)
Squadron Q.M.S. C. W. Cliff, Army Service Corps (Wolverhampton)
Cpl. H. L. Clifford, Gloucestershire Regiment (Golden Valley)
C.S. Maj. A. Coates, Royal Engineers (Gainsborough)
Supt Clk Q.M.S. E. Coates, Rifle Brigade (Poole)
Pte. W. Cochrane, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Q.M.S. J. A. Cockaday, Royal Garrison Artillery (Freshwater, Isle of Wight)
Sgt. F. Colclough, North Staffordshire Regiment (Fenton)
Spr. A. J. Cole, Royal Engineers (Biggleswade)
Gnr. F. E. Coleman, Royal Garrison Artillery (Fulham)
Pte. H. J. Colhna, Army Service Corps (Rye)
Staff Sergeant J. Collins, Army Ordnance Corps (Walworth)
C.S. Maj. W. Collins, Army Service Corps (Islington)
L. Cpl. H. A. Collison, Military Foot Police (Middlesbro)
Sgt. A. J. Cook, Army Service Corps (Manor Park, London)
Sgt. A. J. Cook, Royal Flying Corps (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
B.Q.M. Sgt. H. Cooke, Grenadier Guards (Northampton)
Pte. W. J. Cooke, Army Service Corps (E. Woolwich)
Pte. T. B. W. Cookson, Army Service Corps (Battersea)
Cpl. C. E. Cooper, Rifle Brigade (Bexley Heath)
Spr. J. E. Connolly, Royal Engineers (nr Crump, sail)
Pte. T. Connolly, Royal Irish Regiment (Edinburgh)
Sgt. T. Corless, Army Service Corps (Blackpool)
Spr. T. Cosher, Royal Engineers (Barry, Wales)
C.S. Maj. J. T. Coverley, Royal Engineers (Chesterfield)
Pte. W. Cowell, Liverpool Regiment (Douglas, Isle of M)
Pte. H. W. G. Cox, East Kent Regiment (Ashford, Middlesex)
J. H. Cox, Army Service Corps (Gosport)
Pte. Machine Gun L. Cox, Army Service Corps (Leigh)
Spr. J. Cracknell, Royal Engineers (Whitstorie)
Pte. A. J. Crisp, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry, attd. Infantry Brigade (Westminster)
Spr. W. Cromarty, Royal Engineers (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Staff Sergeant Foreman of Works H. G. Croot, Royal Engineers (Mutley)
Sgt. F. Crosby, Army Service Corps (Langham)
Sgt. F. T. Croxford, Labour Corps (Maidenhead, Berks.)
Sgt. H. A. Cruxton, Army Service Corps (Birmingham)
Supt Clerk W. Cullen, Royal Berkshire Regiment (Aughnacloy, County Tyrone)
Sgt. T. Cummins, Royal Flying Corps (Bristol)
Sgt. J. A. Cundy, Royal Flying Corps (St. Johns Wood)
Sgt. W. Currie, Royal Garrison Artillery (Harrogate)
Spr. H. L. Curtis, Royal Engineers (Tufnell Park, London)
RQM Sergeant F. Dale, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Plumstead)
Q.M.S. W. H. Daniels, RAMC (Linthorpe)
Staff Sergeant S. J. Daly, Army Service Corps (Jersey Army Service Corps (Pimlico)
C.Q.M.S. F. Owen, Royal Engineers (Chatham)
R.S. Maj. S. Oxford, Dragoons (Felixstowe)
Staff Sergeant A. Padget, Army Service Corps (Wakefield)
Sgt. G. T. Palmer, Royal Engineers (Beaumaris)
Mechanist Staff Sergeant J. W. Paltridge, Army Service Corps (Plymouth)
Pte. C. V. Parker, Army Service Corps (Brighton)
Sgt. J. Parker, Army Service Corps (Braintree)
Staff Sergeant J. Parr, RAMC (St. Helens)
Cpl. W. E. Patterson, Army Service Corps (Cork)
Sgt. A. Pattison, RAMC (Sheffield)
Sgt. S. A. Payne, Royal Engineers (Bootle)
Pte. A. H. Peacock, Army Service Corps (now Royal Fusiliers) (E. Woolwich)
Armament Q.M.S. F. E. Peake, Army Ordnance Corps (Woolwich)
Battery Sergeant Major J. Pearoe, Royal Field Artillery (Stoke-on Trent)
Staff Sergeant A. Pearson, RAMC (Swmton)
C.Q.M.S. J. H. Pearson, Cheshire Regiment (Stockport)
R.S. Maj. A. Peasgood, Lincolnshire Regiment (Stamford)
Staff Sergeant Major C. G. Pedder, Army Service Corps (Beckenham)
Battery Sergeant Major G. J. Penn, Royal Field Artillery (Tooting)
C.S. Maj. A. Penny, Royal Engineers (E. Cork)
Pte. H. T. Penny, London Regiment (W. Baling)
C.S. Maj. J. Penwarden, Royal Engineers (Cheriton)
B.Q.M. Sgt. T. W. Percivall, London Regiment (Wood Green)
Act. Sgt. E. D. Petter, Royal Garrison Artillery (West Wittering)
Sgt. T. Pettigrew, Labour Corps (Paisley)
Q.M.S. F. A. Philbrook, RAMC (Colchester)
Sgt. E. J. Phillips, Royal Engineers (E. Swindon)
Staff Sergeant H. S. Phillpott, Army Ordnance Corps (Ilford)
Gnr. B. Pick, Royal Garrison Artillery (Chopwell)
Sgt. C. Pipe, North Lancashire Regiment (Bungay)
Cpl. J. Pirie, Gordon Highlanders (Airdrie)
C.S. Maj. H. Placey, A. G. Staff (Henley-on-Thames)
Pte. A. H. Pollaid, Army Service Corps (Leicester)
Sgt. E. C. Pope, Rifle Brigade (Southampton)
Cpl. E. W. Pople, Royal Engineers (Burnham)
C.Q.M.S. F. G. Pook, Machine Gun Corps (Upper Tooting, London)
Sgt. P. J. Pook, RAMC (Sidcup)
L. Cpl. D. G. S. Porter, Military Foot Police, attd. Military Mounted Police (Aldershot)
Q.M.S. T. H. Potter, RAMC (Tuebrook, Liverpool)
Sgt. H. H. Pottinger, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Act. Company, Sergeant Major R. Prance, A. G. Staff (Bideford)
L. Cpl. A. L. Pratt, Army Service Corps (Nuneaton)
C.S. Maj. F. J. Pratt, Royal Engineers (Ipswich)
Sgt. L. A. Pratt, RAMC (Kirtlington)
Sgt. A. N. Preston, Army Service Corps (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Sgt. W. H. Preston, Royal Fusiliers (Wimbledon)
Staff Sergeant Major J. A. Pringle, Army Service Corps (Maryport)
Sgt. W. Pringle, Royal Army Veterinary Corps (Newmarket)
Petty Officer W. Punton, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Pelaw-on-Tyne)
Squadron Q.M.S. G. E. Pyne, Army Service Corps (Conways Cross, County Sligo)
Fitter Sergeant F. Ramsav, Royal Flying Corps (Snaith)
C.Q.M.S. A. G. Randall, Royal Engineers (Walthamstow)
Cpl. J. O. Handle, RAMC (Leicester)
Battery Sergeant Major A. G. Rae, Royal Garrison Artillery (Ditton)
Cpl. T. W. Rea, Army Service Corps (Spittal)
Battery Sergeant Major W. Read, Royal Field Artillery (Ipswich)
Sgt. H. Rekes, Army Service Corps (Aldershot)
Sgt. T. J. Rees, Royal Engineers (West Ham)
Staff Sergeant Major W. R. Rees, Army Service Corps (Crawthorne)
Dvr. H. Render, Royal Garrison Artillery (Middleham)
Squadron Q.M.S. G. Richardson, Army Service Corps (Shotley Bridge)
Sgt. J. Richardson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Tyne Dock)
Sgt. Major S. Richmond, Army Service Corps (Shoreham-by-Sea)
Cpl. T. S. Rickard, Army Service Corps (Tottenham)
Sgt. T. W. Rider, Middlesex Regiment (Hoxton)
Sgt. A. E. Ridley, Royal Engineers (Regents Park, London)
Cpl. J. Ripley, Royal Engineers (Leeds)
Sgt. J. H. Roberts, London Regiment (Anerley, London)
Mechanic Sergeant Major W. Robertson, Army Service Corps (Hampstead)
Sgt. C. Robinson, Army Service Corps (Farnborough)
L. Cpl. J. Robson, Royal Engineers (High Haworth)
C.S. Maj. W. Robson, Gordon Highlanders (Glasgow)
2nd Cpl. L. J. Rogers, Royal Engineers (Tottenham)
Sgt. A. Roper, Dorsetshire Regiment (Arne)
B.Q.M. Sgt. H. Rose, London Regiment (Forest Hill, London)
Sgt. W. R. Rose, Machine Gun Corps (Birmingham)
1st Class Staff Sergeant Major T. Rowan, Army Service Corps (Limerick)
Cpl. B. H. Russell, Liverpool Regiment (New Brighton)
Staff Sergeant A. J. Ryan, Army Service Corps (Saffron Walden)
L. Cpl. T. Ryan, Royal Engineers (Patricroft)
Sgt. J. Salter, Army Ordnance Corps (Pawlett)
Sgt. A. W. A. L. Sample, Royal Engineers (York)
C.Q.M.S. Sergeant J. Samuels, Royal Engineers (Ashton-on-Mersey)
Dvr. E. Sandroff, Army Service Corps (Homerton)
Mechanist Staff Sergeant D. W. Sarbutt, Army Service Corps (Ipswich)
Sgt. R. H. Sarginson, Royal Fusiliers (West Hartlepool)
C.S. Maj. C. Saunders, Labour Corps (Lattlehampton)
Sgt. C. S. Saunders, Royal Engineers (Fulham, London)
L. Cpl. W, Saville, Royal Engineers (Thorpe, Leeds)
Q.M.S. C. A. Scarbrow, RAMC (Banwell)
Cpl. W. Scobie, Royal Highlanders (Blackford)
Cpl. A. Scott, Royal Engineers (Tranent)
Cpl. J. Scott, Royal Engineers (Newcastle)
Tmp M.S. M. H. Schofield, Army Service Corps (E. Colchester)
Tmp Sub-Condr J. Sedgwick, Army Ordnance Corps (Howgill)
Sgt. H. W. Selden, RAMC (Lincoln)
Sqn. Cpl. Major R. Sensier, Life Guards (Ascot)
Act. Cpl. J. Sewell, Labour Corps (late Royal Fusiliers) (Canning Town, London)
Staff Sergeant Major W. Sewell, North Irish Horse (Dublin)
Sgt. C. J. Sharp, Royal Engineers (Aldershot)
Sgt. J. Sharp, York & Lancaster Regiment (Haigh, near Barnsley) London
1st Writer L. E. Sharp, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Brixton)
Sgt. R. Sharp, Royal Engineers (Taunton)
C.S. Maj. W. A. Sharpe, Royal Engineers (Wandsworth)
L. Cpl. A. Shaw, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Bowerham)
B.Q.M. Sgt. J. Shepherd, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Coventry)
Cpl. S. Shield, Army Ordnance Corps (Liverpool)
Sgt. S. H. Shinton, South Staffordshire Regiment (Wolverhampton)
Pte. F. W. Shorney, Army Service Corps (Neath)
Staff Sergeant F. V. Sibbald, Army Service Corps (Cork)
Staff Sergeant Major T.F . Siddle, Army Service Corps (Elswick)
Mechanic Staff Sergeant D. Silverstone, Army Service Corps (Leyton)
Squadron Q.M.S. W. Silvester, Royal Engineers (Portsmouth)
Pte. J. J. Simmons, Army Service Corps (Kingstown, County Dublin)
R.S. Maj. W. E. Simmons, Royal Field Artillery (Sheffield)
Sgt. J. Slater, Royal Garrison Artillery (Southsea)
Sgt. H. Sleigh, Army Service Corps (Walsall)
C.S. Maj. A. Smith, Army Service Corps (Stratford)
Sgt. A. Smith, London Regiment (Rotherhithe)
Sgt. D. W. Smith, Northumberland Fusiliers (Aberdeen)
B.Q.M. Sgt. F. Smith, Royal Field Artillery (Walton-on-Thames)
Pte. H. P. Smith, Army Service Corps (Twickenham)
Dvr. J. Smith, Army Service Corps (Shepherd's Bush)
Staff Sergeant Major Sup Clk R. Smith, Middlesex Regiment (West Baling)
Sgt. R. A. Smith, Royal Engineers CPaisley)
Sgt. W. Smith, Northumberland Fusiliers (Hull)
C.S. Maj. J. Smoothey, Machine Gun Corps (Rochford)
Act. Sgt. Major W. J. Smyrk, Royal Flying Corps (Islington)
Far. Q.M.S. J. C. Sobey, Dragoon Guards (Hornsey)
Squadron Q.M.S. E. N. Soilleux, Army Service Corps (Whitstable)
Sgt. Royal Artillery Sparling, York & Lancaster Regiment (Sheffield)
C.S. Maj. W. J. Speller, Royal Engineers (Maidenhead)
L. Cpl. A. Spmks, South Lancashire Regiment (Warrington)
Cpl. A. J. Spry, Royal Marine Light Infantry (Landulpa)
Sgt. W. D. Stafford, Royal Fusiliers (Pietermaritzburg)
Tmp Sub Conductor F. G. Stagg, Army Ordnance Corps (Portsmouth)
Sgt. H. Standen, Military Mounted Police (Wanrkworth)
Sgt. W. A. Stephens, Army Service Corps (Cloughfold)
Squadron Q.M.S. J. Stephenson, Army Service Corps (Gateshead)
Sgt. B. Stoddart Durham Light Infantry (Barnard Castle)
Cpl. A. J. Stokes, Royal Garrison Artillery (Poole)
Cpl. A. Stone, Army Ordnance Corps (Erith)
Sgt. A. Strain, Royal Engineers (Alexandria, N.B.)
Conductor J. Strange, Army Ordnance Corps (St. Heliers, Jersey)
Sgt. A. T. Strivens, Army Service Corps (East Ham)
Superindending Clerk G. T. Stroud, Royal Engineers (Gillingham)
2nd Cpl. G. D. Sutton, Royal Engineers (Northwich)
Fitter Sergeant W. H. Sweeting, Royal Flying Corps (Cirencester)
Sgt. W. Sylvester, Army Service Corps (Brownhills)
1st Class Staff Sergeant Major T. A. Taoey, Army Service Corps (Barnsbury)
Sgt. A. Tannahill, Northumberland Fusiliers (Gateshead)
Cpl. E. C. Tansley, RAMC (Coventry)
Sup. Clerk H. Targett, Royal Engineers (Houghton)
Sgt. C. A. Taylor, Royal Engineers (Farnham)
Conductor E. H. Taylor, Army Ordnance Corps (St. George's, Bermuda)
Sgt. F. W. D. Taylor, Army Service Corps (Weeley)
Act. Sgt. H. D. Taylor, Royal Engineers (Brackley)
Tmp Sergeant Major H. W. Taylor, Royal Engineers (Gillingham)
Sgt. T. Taylor, Machine Gun Corps (Leominster)
Sgt. W. L. Taylor, Army Service Corps (Nunhead)
Sgt. F. W. Toake, Royal Garrison Artillery (Tatterham)
Sgt. T. Thomas, Royal Berkshire Regiment (Briton, Ferry, Glamorgan)
Sgt. W. Thomasson, Shropshire Light Infantry (Bolton, Lancaster)
Sgt. Major A. Thompson, RAMC (Manchester)
C.Q.M.S. P. Thompson, Machine Gun Corpsr (Knottingley)
Cpl. W. F. B. Thompson, Labour Corps (Kensal Rise)
L. Cpl. J. Mel Thomson, Royal Engineers (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Act. Sgt. J. Thornhill, Labour Corps (Customs House)
Sgt. T. Thornly, Royal Army Veterinary Corps (Colchester)
C.S. Maj. R. Tildesley, Army Service Corps (Willenhall)
Bombr. C. W. Tilt, Royal Garrison Artillery (Browsgrove)
Pte. A. W. Tippitts, Army Service Corps, attd. Labour Company, now Royal Engineers (E. Woolwich)
Act. Staff Sergeant A. Tomkins, Army Ordnance Corps (Portslade)
C.Q.M.S. W. Trappett, Royal Engineers (Curragh)
Staff Sergeant V. Tnppv RAMC (Clapton)
Sup Clerk Sergeant Major M. Trippas, Rifle Brigade Mold)
Squadron Q.M.S. C. H. Tuke, Army Service Corps (Lichfield)
Sgt. A. N. Turner, Army Service Corps (Whitstable)
Act. Sgt. H. Turner, A.G. Staff (Norwich)
C.Q.M.S. J. Turner, Manchester Regiment (Bradford)
C.S. Maj. J. Turner, Royal Engineers (Gillingham)
Sgt. W. J. Turner, RAMC (Lurgan, County Armagh)
Cpl. F. Tustin, Royal Engineers (Hither Green)
Cpl. V. V. J. Unmey, Army Ordnance Corps (Lower Monkstown, County Cork)
Bombr. R. Underwood, Royal Garrison Artillery (Kildare)
Sgt. G. Utley, Royal Garrison Artillery (York)
Sgt. A. Valentine, Royal Garrison Artillery (Leeds)
Battery Sergeant Major L. W. Venables, Royal Garrison Artillery (Saltby)
R.S. Maj. J. Vevers, Royal Field Artillery (Chapel-en-le-Frith)
Pte. J. Vincent, Army Service Corps (now Labour Corps) (E. Woolwich)
R.S. Maj. A. Vian, Royal Field Artillery (South Norwood)
L. Cpl. W. H. Waddell, MF P. (Corby)
C.S. Maj. Artillery Clerk E. B. Wager, Royal Garrison Artillery (Wellingborough)
Sgt. J. Wainwright, Royal Flying Corps (Caledonian Road, London)
Sgt. W. J. Wainwright, Royal Engineers (Smallthorne)
C.Q.M.S. F. C. Walker, Highland Light Infantry (Tuffnel Park)
Act. Staff Sergeant J. Walker, Army Ordnance Corps (Halifax)
Pte. R. W. Walker, Army Ordnance Corps (Pembroke Dock)
Cpl. E. E. Wallace, Royal Engineers (Bury St. Edmunds)
Mechanic Staff Sergeant P. Walmsley, Army Service Corps (Bolton)
Pte. C. E. Walter, Army Service Corps (Woolwich)
Squadron Q.M.S. J. Walthew, Army Service Corps (Middlesbro)
Sgt. Major A. J. Warburton, Royal Army Veterinary Corps (Bradford)
Pte. F. Ward, Army Service Corps (Manchester)
Cpl. W. H. Ward, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Bude)
Cpl. F. C. Warden, RAMC (Derby)
Act. C.Q.M.S. S. L. Wareham, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. J. Waters, RAMC (Tyldesley)
Cpl. A. Watson, Army Service Corps (Boroughbridge)
Sgt. T. Watson, Royal Garrison Artillery (Warrington)
Sgt. H. Webb, Royal Flying Corps (Finsbury Park, London)
Fitter Sergeant T. O. Webber, Royal Flying Corps (Hawkhurst)
C. G. Webster, Royal Field Artillery (East Ham)
Sgt. N. F. Webster, West Yorkshire Regiment(Leeds)
Cpl. A. Weeks, Royal Engineers (Dublin)
Staff Sergeant Major B. G. Weiss, Army Service Corps (Salisbury)
Air Mechanic, 1st Class J. G. Weldon, Royal Flying Corps (Sefton Park)
R.S. Maj. G. H. Weller, Royal Engineers (Newark)
Sgt. A. Wells, Royal West Kent Regiment (Hawkhnrstt
Tmp Staff Sergeant Major D. Wells, Army Service Corps (Folkestone)
Sgt. H. O. Welsh, Durham Light Infantry (Gateshead)
Q.M.S. T. Wheway, RAMC (Leicester)
Sgt. W. Whiston, Middlesex Regiment (Hanley, Staffs.)
Fitter Sergeant E. E. White, Royal Flying Corps (Camberley)
Q.M.S. H. White, RAMC (Waisail)
Sgt. J. White, Royal Engineers (Willesden)
Pte. W. White, Dragoon Guards (Wickford)
Cpl. W. H. C. White, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bristol)
Staff Sergeant L. J. Whitehorn, Royal Engineers (Clapham, London)
Sgt. J. W. Whitehouse, Army Service Corps (Tipton)
Sgt. L. Whiteley, Army Service Corps (E. Liverpool)
C.S. Maj. F. H. Whitfield, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (South Tottenham)
Cpl. W. Wignall, RAMC (Liverpool)
Sgt. Major Superintendent Clerk W. Wilcock, Royal Engineers (E. Bristol)
Armament Q.M.S. J. Wilkinson, Army Ordnance Corps (Fleet)
Staff Sergeantmith T. Wilkinson, Royal Engineers (Fermoy)
Cpl. W. E. Willcockson, Labour Corps (Kingsland Road, London)
Squadron Q.M.S. F. A. Williams, Army Service Corps (Altrincham)
L. Cpl. G. Williams, Military Mounted Police (Richmond)
Sgt. W. G. Willis, Royal Flying Corps (Bristol)
Pte. W. J. Willis, Army Service Corps (Swindon)
Act. Sgt. Major A. H. Willson, Army Ordnance Corps (Penge)
Tmp Sub Conductor T. Wilson, Army Ordnance Corps (Plumstead)
Q.M.S. W. Wisdom, Royal Engineers (Shepherd's Bush)
Pte. A. L. Witts, Army Service Corps (Worcester)
Sgt. W. Wonfor, Labour Corps (Surbiton)
Sgt. E. J. Wood, Military Mounted Police (Taplow)
Act. Staff Sergeant T. W. Wood, Army Ordnance Corps (Stafford)
Sgt. J. Woodcock, Royal Field Artillery (South Shields)
Sgt. A. Woods, Labour Corps (Lytham, Lancaster)
Q.M.S. J. A. I. Woods, South Wales Borderers (Diss)
R.S. Maj. A. Worsfold, Royal Field Artillery (Winsford)
Far. Staff Sergeant A. A. Wright, R. M. (New Cross, London)
Gnr. J. Wright, Royal Garrison Artillery (Lincoln)
Pte. J. Wright, Royal Army Veterinary Corps (West Lynn)
Sgt. J. Wright, Royal Scots (Edinburgh)
Sgt. W. L. R. Wright, Royal Army Veterinary Corps (Manchester)
Pte. G. H. Wrigglesworth, East Yorkshire Regiment (E. York)
Sgt. J. R. Yarrow, Royal Garrison Artillery (Shoeburyness)
Q.M.S. S. W. Yardley, Royal Engineers (Moulton)
C.S. Maj. H. Yarnall, Army Service Corps (Leicester)
B.Q.M. Sgt. H. Yates, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Wolverhampton)
C.S. Maj. W. C. Yealand, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
C.Q.M.S. A. J. Young, Royal Engineers (Hulme)
Pte. P. A. Young, Army Service Corps (Lewisham)
Sgt. V. L. Young, Royal Engineers (Chatham)
Pte. D. Smyth, Royal Irish Rifles (Dromore)
Pte. H. Clarke, Army Service Corps (Whitchurch)
Australian Imperial Force
Sgt. P. de M. Abbott, Army Medical Corps
2nd Cpl. C. P. Atkins, Engineers
Sgt. H. C. Behaun, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. L. K. Bridge, Infantry
Sgt. W. A. Bryant, Infantry
Able Seamanattery Q.M.S. P. S. Game, Infantry
Sgt. W. H. H. Carpenter, Army Service Corps
Sgt. W. C. Cheesenian, Light Trench Mortar Battery
Warrant Officer Artr. F. N. Conradi, Army Ordnance Corps
Warrant Officer 1st Class, W. C. Copperthwaite, Infantry
Warrant Officer J. M. Davis, Division HQ Clerical Staff
Sgt. H. O. S. Drew, Infantry
Sgt. D. J. Duggan, Field Artillery Brigade
Sgt. F. F. Eddie, Army Medical Corps
Warrant Officer S. E. Emms, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. C. Evans, Infantry
Sgt. J. Flackfield, Engineers
2nd Cpl. J. D. Fletcher, Engineers
Sgt. A. H. Fortescue, Army Service Corps
Warrant Officer G. W. Fulton, AHQ Clerical Staff
Warrant Officer J. T. Goodhall, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. H. C. Hopkins, Infantry
C.Q.M.S. C. H. Howitt, Infantry
Staff Sergeant R. L. Kennedy, Army Medical Corps
Staff Sergeant W. H. S. Kerr, Anzac Prov. Corps
Warrant Officer 1st Class, L. L. Lethlean, Engineers
Cpl. S. F. E. Liebert, Engineers
L. Cpl. W. G. Lincoln, Cyclist Battalion
Staff Sergeant E. A. Lockhart, Infantry
Warrant Officer G. N. Mackie, Infantry
Pte. T. W. Martin, Infantry
Dvr. W. P. Martin, Engineers
B.Q.M. Sgt. J. J. McCredie, Army Ordnance Corps
Staff Sergeant D. McNaught, Royal Army Veterinary Corps
Sgt. W. H. Millar, Engineers
Cpl. N. G. Mills, Engineers
C.Q.M.S. O. T. Mills, Infantry
Staff Sergeant G. L. Morris, Infantry
B.Q.M. Sgt. R. A. Murdoch, Infantry
Sgt. G. Patrick, Engineers
Tmp Warrant Officer H. L. Peck, Royal Army Pay Corps
Warrant Officer W. Poole, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. J. H. Powell, Infantry
Staff Sergeant E. P. Prendergast, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. W. Quarrie, Army Service Corps
Warrant Officer F. C. Roberts, Army Medical Corps
Cpl. A. Sinclair, Engineers
Sgt. D. R. Smith, Anzac Hqrs
R.S. Maj. E. E. Solley, Clerical Staff, HQ
C.S. Maj. J. H. Steer, Engineers
Cpl. J. S. Stevenson, Infantry
Tmp Warrant Officer S. J. Stott, HQ
C.Q.M.S. C. R. Stubbs, Army Service Corps
Sgt. H. C. G. Thurlow, Engineers
B.Q.M. Sgt. F. G. Turner, Infantry
C.S. Maj. /C. J. Vause, Engineers
Conductor T. D. Watson, Army Ordnance Corps
Tmp Conductor M. C. Welch, Army Ordnance Corps
B.Q.M. Sgt. A. W. T. White, Pioneer Battalion
Staff Sergeant Major T. C. Wilkinson, Anzac Prov. Corps
Sgt. J. R. Wilson, Infantry
Warrant Officer A. F. Woollard, Engineers
Sgt. H. F. Young, Infantry
Canadian Force
Sgt. A. J. Addy, Canadian Railway Troops
Sgt. H. P. Allberry, Infantry
Sgt. R. F. Allen, Engineers
Sgt. H. A. Buckle, Infantry
Sgt. W. H. Charlesworth, Canadian Railway Troops
Sgt. D. Collins, Canadian Railway Troops
Sgt. J. Craddock, Pioneer Battalion
Sgt. Major E. B. Davies, Infantry
Sgt. J. C. H. Davies, Engineers
Cpl. H. W. Dawes, Canadian Sub-Staff, late Machine Gun Corps
Sgt. W. H. Dean, Canadian Railway Troops
Staff Sergeant R. Drummond, Army Service Corps
Sgt. J. Duckworth, Infantry
Act. Q.M.S. H. W. Dunk, Ordance Corps
Sgt. Major P. G. Fairbrother, Cavalry
Sgt. Major J. Farmer, Canadian Sub Staff
Sgt. W. H. Foote, Infantry
Cpl. H. H. Goodall, Infantry
Act. Sgt. Major S. W. Graham, Ordnance Corps
Act. Cpl. J. Grier, Infantry
Sgt. J. Harper, Infantry
Staff Sergeant G. A. Harris, Army Service Corps
Battery Sergeant Major E. Hineson, Artillery
Q.M.S. H. G. Iliffe, Canadian Sub-Staff
Staff Sergeant W. A. Jeffs, Cyclist Corps
Pte. W. Johnson, Canadian Sub-Staff
Cpl. C. Kennedy, Rly Troops
Sgt. D. King, Canadian Railway Troops
Sgt. Major C. E. Lamb, Canadian Sub-Staff
Cpl. J. G. MacGregor, Labour Battalion
Pte. W. M. MacLean, Canadian Railway Troops
Cpl. R. McDonald, Canadian Railway Troops
Act. Sgt. J. H. McKenzie, Canadian Forestry Corps
Staff Sergeant J. Milroy, attd. Canadian General Base Depot
Sgt. G. Morgan, Infantry
Pte. L. G. Mounoe, Canadian Forestry Corps
Cpl. D. R. Murray, Infantry
Staff Sergeant H. Prior, Canadian Sub-Staff
Staff Sergeant A. E. Ross, Army Service Corps
Cpl. M. E. Rugg, Army Service Corps
Sgt. K. S. Russell, Infantry
Gnr. L. A. Shaver, Division Artillery
C.S. Maj. W. R. Spencer, Engineers
Q.M.S. D. H. Strutt, Infantry
Staff Sergeant G. H. Taylor, Army Medical Corps
Q.M.S. A. E. Tomlin, Canadian Sub-Staff
Sgt. T. M. Turner, Infantry
Staff Sergeant R. Webber, Canadian Railway Troops
Battery Sergeant Major J. Whitts, Field Artillery
New Zealand Force
Sgt. D. Cameron, Pioneers
Sgt. S. S. Choate, Clerical Staff
B.Q.M. Sgt. E. S. Colebrook, Rifle Brigade
L. Cpl. S. V. Forrest, Auckland Regiment
Sgt. G. H. Griffin, Wellington Regiment
C.S. Maj. A. H. Guy, Canterbury Regiment
Sgt. R. E. Hunt, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. T. Jones, Auckland Regiment
C.S. Maj. T. Kenna, Engineers
Pte. J. G. Langrish, Rifle Brigade
Staff Sergeant Major G. E. Lovell, Canterbury Regiment
L. Cpl. J. Mercer, Rifle Brigade
Staff Sergeant G. R. Robinson, New Zealand Medical Corps
Cpl. L. Shaw, Rifle Brigade
L. Cpl. T. Smith, Rifle Brigade
Staff Sergeant H. L. Walden, Postal Service
South African Force
Dvr. J. Bryant, Army Service Corps
Dvr. C. N. Gabriel, Army Service Corps
Dvr. P. G. Locker, Army Service Corps
Sgt. C. McPherson, Infantry
Sgt. H. Ritchie, Signal Company, Engineers
Sgt. C. H. V. Sowden, Engineers
Indian Army
Staff Sergeant J. R. Howey, Indian Miscellaneous List, attd. Indian Sec., General Headquarters
Cond. E. V. Johnson, Indian Ordn. Department
Far. Staff Sergeant S. Mills, Indian Subordnance Veterinary Department
Sub Conductor E. T. Walsh, Supply and Transport Corps, attd. Lucknow CCS
Staff Sergeant J. E. Walsh, Indian Miscellaneous List
Military Medal (MM)[edit]
Pte. F. W. Abell, South Staffordshire Regiment (Leicester)
Sgt. W. G. Abor, Honourable Artillery Company (Wallington)
Pte. G. H. Ackland, Grenadier Guards (Bow, London)
Sgt. O. T. Acton, Machine Gun Corps (Horton Kirby)
Pte. A. H. Adams, North Staffordshire Regiment (Cheadle)
Sgt. J. Adamson, Seaforth Highlanders (Motherwell)
Bombr. A. Adie, Royal Field Artillery (Bayswater W.)
Pte. R. Affleck, Scots Guards (Johnstone)
L. Cpl. W. Agnew DCM Royal Engineers (Belfast)
Pte. R. Ainscow, Lancashire Fusiliers (Pendleton)
Pte. R. Alderson, Grenadier Guards (Hawes)
Pte. D. Allan, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Buckhaven)
L. Cpl. J. McP. Allan, Scots Guards (Glasgow)
Spr. F. S. Allen, Royal Engineers (Derby)
Dvr. J. H. Allen, Royal Field Artillery (Otley)
L. Cpl. R. Allenby, Northumberland Fusiliers Norristhorpe)
L. Cpl. F. Allison, Yorkshire Regiment (Everingham)
Gnr. F. H. Allon, Royal Field Artillery (Hexham)
Sgt. W. Allsopp, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Watford)
Dvr. H. Alexander, Royal Field Artillery (Finsbury, E.G.)
Pte. P. Alexander, Welsh Regiment (Poulton-Wallasey)
Cpl. J. E. Ames, Middlesex Regiment (Manor Park)
Pte. H. Amey, Dorsetshire Regiment (Farnham)
Cpl. J. Amos, Royal Field Artillery (Moffat)
Cpl. A. Anderson, Royal Highlanders (Dunfennline)
Cpl. J. Anderson, Royal Field Artillery (Tyrone)
Pte. J. Anderson, Liverpool Regiment (Liver pool)
Sgt. J. C. Andrew, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Truro)
Sgt. A. Andrews, Machine Gun Corps (Lyndhurst)
Sgt. A. Appleby, Royal Field Artillery (Houghtonle-Spring)
Sgt. W. Appleby, Northumberland Fusiliers (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Pte. T. Appleyard, Northumberland Fusiliers (Cudworth)
Pte. A. E. Apps, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. R. F. Archibald, Gordon Highlanders (Glasgow)
Pte. A. Armsby, Norfolk Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Corps (Downham)
Pte. W. Armstrong, Irish Guards (Newbliss)
Pte. V. A. Arnold, West Riding Regiment (Norfolk)
Pte.A. H. Arundell, Royal West Kent Regiment (Rotherhithe)
Cpl. S. Ashcroft, Labour Corps (Walton)
Pte. W. Ashe, Grenadier Guards (Middlesbrough)
Fitter Sergeant A. Ashley, Royal Field Artillery (Altrinc. bam)
L. Cpl. W. H. Ashman, Royal Engineers (Bath)
Cpl. C. Ashton, Royal Field Artillery (Kirton-in. Lindsey)
Gnr. R. Ashton, Royal Field Artillery (Shipley)
Pte. R. Ashworth, Lancashire Fusiliers (Rochdale)
Pte. A. Askew, Bedfordshire Regiment (Yaxley)
Pte. J. Askew, Grenadier Guards (Long Ichington)
Pte. H. P. Atherton, Cheshire Regiment (Chester)
Pte. A. F. Atkin, York & Lancaster Regiment (Sheffield)
L. Cpl. A. B. Atkinson, Gordon Highlanders (Leith)
Spr. G. Atkinson, Royal Engineers (Gateshead)
Pte. J. W. Atkinson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Darlington)
Sgt. R. R. Atkinson, Norfolk Regiment (Brighton)
Cpl. W. Atkinson, Royal Engineers (Leeds)
Pte. W. Atkinson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Scarborough)
Cpl. D. C. Attwood, Royal Engineers (Greenwich)
Pte. A. E. Austin, Seaforth Highlanders (Oxford)
Pte. S. Austin, Royal West Kent Regiment (E. New Cross)
Act. Cpl. T. Austin, South Staffordshire Regiment (Darlaston)
Gnr. J. Avenell, Royal Field Artillery (Maidstone)
Cpl. W. Attwood, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Southall)
Pte. A. C. Avery, Rifle Brigade (London)
L. Cpl. C. Babb, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Marhamchurch)
Dvr. B. Bache, Royal Field Artillery (Worcester)
L. Cpl. 8 Back, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (Leeds, Kent)
Pte. A. H. Bailey, Coldstream Guards (Eccleshall)
L. Cpl. F. S. Bailey, South Staffordshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Dvr. S. Bailey, Royal Field Artillery (York)
Spr. J. Baillie, Royal Engineers (Mulengavie)
Cpl. A. Baker, Royal Field Artillery (E. Finchley)
Pte. A E. Baker, Suffolk Regiment (Nacton)
Sgt. C. Baker, Royal Horse Artillery (Trowbridge)
Pte. C. J. Baker, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Brading, Isle of Wight)
L. Cpl. H. J. Baker, Royal Sussex Regiment (Goring-on-Sea)
Act. Cpl. R. Baker, Machine Gun Corps (E. Camiberwell)
Pte. L. M. Baldwin, East Surrey Regiment (Gorleston-on-Sea)
Pte. W. J. Bale, London Regiment (Tollington Park)
Pte. G. Ball, Rifle Brigade (Islington)
Pitt. E. Ballantyne, Royal Field Artillery (Seaham Harbour)
Pte. V. Ballard, Machine Gun Corps (Kingston-on-Thames)
Sgt. P. Ballinger, Royal Garrison Artillery (Darlington)
Cpl. T. Balshaw, Gordon Highlanders (Chorley)
Pte. A. Bamford, Gloucestershire Regiment (Clifton)
Pte. J. W. Banks, Coldstream Guards (Wolverhampton)
Pte. J. Bannan, Border Regiment (Carlisle)
L. Cpl. R. Banner, Royal Scots (Perth)
Pte. W. W. Bannister, Suffolk Regiment (Madingley)
Pte. W. Bapty, West Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Cpl. E. Barber, Royal Engineers (Toilbridge)
Pte. C. Barclay, Gordon Highlanders (Drumblade)
Sgt. T. Barclay, Royal Field Artillery (Glasgow)
Pte. G. Barden, Royal West Kent Regiment (Tunbridge Wells)
Pte. E. Barnes, Lincolnshire Regiment (Gainsborough)
Pte. E. Barrow, Army Service Corps (Preston)
Pnr. M. Barry, Royal Engineers (Burnley)
Sgt. P. Barry, Royal Field Artillery (Cork)
Dvr.W. Bartlett, Royal Field Artillery (Fairford)
Sgt. A. E. Barton, West Yorkshire Regiment (York)
Gnr. J. C. Bass, Royal Field Artillery (Mile End, London)
L. Cpl. H. Bassett, Royal Sussex Regiment (Balsall)
Dvr. S. Baster, Royal Field Artillery (Forest Gate, London)
Spr. W. H. Bastin, Royal Engineers (Exeter)
Pte. W. Bateman, West Yorkshire Regiment (Sauchie)
Cpl. G. Bates, Border Regiment (Kettering)
Cpl. A. S. Batley, Norfolk Regiment (Billingford)
Pte. H. Bayliff, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Abergele)
Pte. W. Beardsall, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Retford)
Pnr. A. Beaston, Royal Engineers (Sheffield)
L. Cpl. G. E. Beattie, Northumberland Fusiliers (Felling-on-Tyne)
Sgt. J. Beattie, Machine Gun Corps (Kirkcudbright)
Cpl. J. D. Beattie, Royal Garrison Artillery (Aspatria)
Pte. C. Beckett, Shropshire Light Infantry (Pembroke Dock)
Pte. A. G. Beddoes, London Regiment (Canning Town)
Dvr. C. Belandj Royal Field Artillery (Euston Rd., London)
Pte. E. E. Bell, West Riding Regiment (Otley)
Pte. H. Bell, Machine Gun Corps (Edinburgh)
Cpl. P. Bell, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Kirkintilloch)
Cpl. J. Bell, Devonshire Regiment (Lambeth, London)
Pte. J. Bell, East Yorkshire Regiment (Hull)
Cpl. R. Bell, Northumberland Fusiliers (South Shields)
Pte. J. W. Bellamy, Suffolk Regiment (Dartford)
Cpl. R. S. fielsten, Royal Field Artillery (Bristol)
Sgt. G. Bennett, Royal Field Artillery (Nuneaton)
Act. Bombr. G. Bennett, Royal Field Artillery (Heckmondwike)
Spr. J. Bennett, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Sgt. W. J. Bennett, Devonshire Regiment (Winsbere Buckland)
Sgt. R. F. Benton, Royal Engineers (Railway)
Pte. M. Bergin, Lancashire Fusiliers (Seedley)
Pte. J. T. Berridge, West Riding Regiment (Spalding)
Sgt. F. Berry, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bury)
Sgt. H. Berry, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
Fitter Cpl. W. G. Best, Royal Field Artillery (Blackhalls)
Pte. A. Beswick, Coldstream Guards (Old Kent Road, London)
L. Sgt. E. W. Betts, Coldstream Guards (Doncaster)
Bombr. H. E. Betts, Royal Field Artillery (Kennington, London)
Pte. E. Bevan, South Staffordshire Regiment (Wednesbury)
Pte. A. Bibby, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Blackburn)
Cpl. W. Bibby, Royal Field Artillery (Wigan)
Gnr. G. A. Biggs, Royal Field Artillery (Wandsworth, London)
L. Cpl. W. Bigley, East Yorkshire Regiment (Jarrow)
L. Cpl. J. E. Bilham, Royal Sussex Regiment (Norwich)
Pte. J. Billington, York & Lancaster Regiment (Wombwell)
Pte. B. C. Bingham, Royal Sussex Regiment (Brighton)
L. Cpl. W. Bingham, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Crewe)
Sgt. C. Birch, West Yorkshire Regiment (Burley)
Spr. W. H. Birch, Royal Engineers (Glasgow)
Cpl. A. H. Bird, Gloucestershire Regiment (Cirencester)
Pte. S. Bird, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Littleport)
Pte. W. Bird, South Staffordshire Regiment (Bridgtown)
SSO/C. J. Birks, Northumberland Fusiliers (Chesterton)
Sgt. G. Birrell, Royal Highlanders (Edinburgh)
Cpl. N. Birtles, Royal Field Artillery (Alderley Edge)
Pte. L. Bishop, York & Lancaster Regiment (South Witham)
Cpl. D. Black, Irish Guards (Kilrueh, County Cork)
Pte. J. Black, Border Regiment (Coundon)
Pte. J. W. Blackburn, West Yorkshire Regiment (Rothwell)
Pte. W. Blaikie, Machine Gun Corps (Berwick-on-Tweed)
Pte. S. J. Blake, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Spital)
Dvr. T. A. Blake, Royal Field Artillery (Bramshaw)
Sgt. H. Blakeley, Royal Garrison Artillery (Leeds)
Pte. E. Blease, Cheshire Regiment (Congleton)
Pte. C. H. Blunden, Royal Sussex Regiment (Walderton)
Sgt. W. Blunt, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Handsworth)
Pte. W. Blythe, Coldstream Guards (Manley, Helsby)
L. Cpl. C. Boardman, South Staffordshire Regiment (Hednesford)
Pte. J. Boardman, Border Regiment (Manchester)
L. Cpl. D. Boath, Royal Engineers (E. Dundee)
Pte. F. E. Bocock, Norfolk Regiment (Louth)
Pte. E. Body, Lincolnshire Regiment (Coleby)
Spr. J. J. Boeg, Royal Engineers (Westbourne Park)
Sgt. G. Bolton, Gordon Highlanders (Blackburn)
Sgt. W. J. Bolton, Hampshire Regiment (Micheldever)
Pte. B. Bond, Grenadier Guards (Stone)
Gnr. W. Bone, Royal Field Artillery (Durham)
Cpl. W. Boniface, Royal Sussex Regiment (Seaford)
Dvr. M. Bonnallo, Royal Field Artillery (Nottingham)
Pte. M. C. Bonnar, Army Service Corps (Paisley)
Pte. W. Bonner, RAMC (Derry)
Pte. F. J. Bond, Devonshire Regiment (Coombe Martin)
Pte. J. Boocock, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Halifax)
L. Cpl. E. Booth, West Riding Regiment (Halifax)
Act. Bombr. J. Booth, Royal Field Artillery (Windhill, Bradford)
Pte. J. Booth, Machine Gun Guards (Tarnworth)
Pte. J. H. Booth, Lancashire Fusiliers (Whitefield)
Pte. M. E. Booth, Coldstream Guards (Upper Holloway, London)
Pte. L. R. B. Booth, Liverpool Regiment (Manchester)
Dvr. T. Booth, Royal Field Artillery (Macclesfield)
L. Cpl. H. Boshier, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Reading)
Pte. G. W. Boswell, Army Service Corps (St. Clements)
L. Sgt. N. A. Bott, Suffolk Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. R. Bottomley, RAMC (Leeds)
Dvr. J. Boughton, Royal Field Artillery (Barnes)
Sgt. H. Bourne, Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Pte. S. F. Bourne, RAMC (Canterbury)
Sgt. N. J. Bournes, Yorkshire Regiment (Rochester)
Pte. C. Bouttell, RAMC (Hackney)
Cpl. G. A. Bowen, North Staffordshire Regiment (Burton-on-Trent)
L. Cpl. E. C. Bower, York & Lancaster Regiment (Sheffield)
Cpl. H. Bower, RAMC (Sheffield)
L. Cpl. W. Bowkett, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Cheltenham)
Pte. J. W. Bown, Leicestershire Regiment (Mansfield)
Pte. J. W. Boxall, Bedfordshire Regiment (Petworth)
Pte. F. H. Boyer, RAMC (Newton Abbot)
Pte. W. Boys, RAMC (Liverpool)
Pte. H. Bradbury, Liverpool Regiment (Manchester)
Pte. J. Bradbury, Manchester Regiment (Salford)
Pte. E. E. Bradfield, Somerset Light Infantry (Bath)
Sgt. C. Bradshaw, Leicestershire Regiment (Coalville)
L. Cpl. R. Bragg, Border Regiment (Halliwell)
Spr. J. Braid, Royal Engineers (Edinburgh)
Pte. S. J. Brain, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bristol)
Pte. L. Brame, Coldstream Guards (Gainsborough)
L. Cpl. G. S. Brampton, Honourable Artillery Company (Westcliff-on-Sea)
Gnr. E. D. Branch, Royal Garrison Artillery (Slingham)
Pte. A. A. Brawn, RAMC (Wellingborough)
Pte. F. A. Brearley, London Regiment (Buiwell)
Pte. C. Breen, Lancashire Fusiliers (Salford)
Pte. J. Breheny, Yorkshire Regiment (South Shields)
L. Sgt. A. Bremner, Gordon Highlanders (Caithness)
Pte. J. K. Brennan, Durham Light Infantry (Quebec)
Pte. H. Bridger, Royal West Kent Regiment (Worthing)
Cpl. T. J. Bridges, Worcestershire Regiment (Kidderminster)
Pte. J. Bridle, Royal West Kent Regiment (Acton)
Pte. G. Briggs, Border Regiment (Irlam)
Sgt. H. Briggs, Royal Field Artillery (Lewes)
Pte. T. W. Briggs, Lancashire Fusiliers (Batley)
Bombr. W. Brigge, Royal Field Artillery (Bradford)
Cpl. R. Brightmore, Royal Engineers (Hulme)
Pte. S. J. Brighton, Suffolk Regiment (St. Peters, Suffolk)
Gnr. W. Brigstock, Royal Field Artillery (Shoreditch, London)
Sgt. H. J. Brimble, Royal Field Artillery (Waiworth)
Cpl. S. Bristow, RAMC (Atherstone)
Pte. D. Brittain, Royal West Kent Regiment (Deptford)
Pte. F. Britton, Royal West Kent Regiment (Kennington)
Dvr. J. A. Brixton, Royal Engineers (Cardiff)
Sgt. G. F. Broadrick, Royal Field Artillery (Doncaster)
Sgt. R. E. Brockbank, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Camforth)
Pte. F. Brooker, Middlesex Regiment (Highgate)
Sgt. J. Brooker, Royal Field Artillery (Acton, London)
L. Sgt. R. Brooker, Coldstream Guards (Peckham, London)
Pte. C. H. Brooks, Manchester Regiment (Swindon)
Spr. F. W. Brooks, Royal Engineers (Burslem)
Pte. G. J. Brooks, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Belvedere)
Spr. J. Brooks, Royal Engineers (Derby)
Pte. R. J. Brooks, Norfolk Regiment (Hickling)
Pte. R. J. Brooks, Coldstream Guards (Hafbury)
L. Cpl. J. Brough, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Clay Cross)
L. Cpl. P. W. Broughton, Royal West Kent Regiment (Tottenham)
L. Cpl. A. Brown, Seaforth Highlanders (Cowdenbeath)
Sgt. A. G. Brown, Labour Corps (Borough, London)
L. Cpl. B. Brown, Devonshire Regiment (Halberton)
Pte. G. Brown, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Bedford)
Dvr. F. J. Brown, Royal Field Artillery (Willesden, London)
L. Sgt. G. Brown, East Surrey Regiment (Rotherlnthe, London)
Sgt. G. E. Brown, Royal Field Artillery (Upper Tooting, London)
Sgt. H. H. Brown, Royal Garrison Artillery (Weymouth)
Pte. J. Brown, Scots Guards (Buckhaven)
L.C. J. H. Brown, Hampshire Regiment (Linkenhorne, Cornwall)
L. Cpl. T. Brown, Royal Engineers (Mumbles)
Spr. W. Brown, Royal Engineers (Worcester)
Pnr. W. H. Brown, Royal Engineers (Leeds)
Pte. T. Broxholme, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Louth)
Pte. W. A. Bruce, London Regiment (King's Cross, London)
Act. Cpl. W. Brueton, South Staffordshire Regiment (Wolverhampton)
Pte. S. Brummit, West Riding Regiment (Dalton)
Sgt. E. A. Bryant, Norfolk Regiment (Diss)
Sgt. F. Bryant, Lincolnshire Regiment (Lincoln)
Spr. W. A. Bryant, Royal Engineers (Coulsdon)
Cpl. H. Bryden, West Riding Regiment (Barnoldswick)
Cpl. A. Buchan, Royal Scots (Bathgate)
Pte. F. T. G. Buchanan, RAMC (East Ham)
Bombr. J. Buchanan, Royal Field Artillery (Glasgow)
Pte. A. Buckley, RAMC (Shaw)
Pte. W. Buckley, West Riding Regiment (Houley)
Pte. F. Bullivant, Worcestershire Regiment (Rastrick)
L. Cpl. P. C. L. H. Bulmer, Royal Engineers (Halifax)
Pte. G. E. Bunce, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Handsworth)
Pte. H. Bunyan, Leicestershire Regiment (Luton)
Pte. J. Burbidge, RAMC (Doncaster)
Pte. P. Burchmore, Northumberland Fusiliers (Stockton-on-Tees)
Sgt. E. S. Burke, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Peckham, London)
Sgt. J. Burke, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Pte. J. F. Burke, North Staffordshire Regiment (Hanley)
Pte. L. Burke, West Riding Regiment (Kigh
Pte. T. Burke, Liverpool Regiment (New York)
Sgt. T. Burkhill, West Yorkshire Regiment (Coxwold)
Pte. A. V. Burns, Coldstream Guards (Bexhill)
Pte. J. W. Burrough, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bristol)
Dvr. T. Burns, Royal Field Artillery (Bradford)
Pte. A. O. Burton, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Neath)
Pte. C. Burton, RAMC (West Hartlepool)
Pte. H. Burton, RAMC (Hunslet)
Sgt. S. Bury, Royal Field Artillery (Moffat, N.B.)
Dvr. E. A. Bustard, Royal Field Artillery (Denmark Hill, London)
Pte. A. E. Butler, Coldstream Guards (Whitechapel, London)
Cpl. A. H. Butler, Royal Berkshire Regiment (Newbury)
Pte. C. H. T. Butler, Machine Gun Corps (Langky)
Gnr. J. Butler, Royal Field Artillery (S. Ealing, London)
Pte. T. Butler, Middlesex Regiment (Sunderland)
Spr. J. Buttle, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Pte. S. V. Button, West Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Sgt. W. Caddick, Royal Garrison Artillery (Coseley)
Pte. P. Cage, East Surrey Regiment (Supeston)
Pte. E. Cahill, Royal West Kent Regiment (Deptford)
Cpl. C. E. Calver, Suffolk Regiment (Dennington)
Gnr. H. Cameron, Royal Garrison Artillery (Lochfyne)
Bombr. M. S. Camp, Royal Field Artillery (Berk, Hampsted)
Cpl. A. Campbell, Gordon Highlanders (S. America)
Staff Sergeant Cpl. J. Campbell, Royal Field Artillery ( (Renfrew)
L. Cpl. W. Campbell, Gordon Highlanders (Rinton)
Pte. E. P. Campion, West Riding Regiment (Manchester)
Gnr. W. Candlin, Royal Field Artillery (Worcester)
Gnr. M. Cannel, Royal Field Artillery (Kilburh, London)
Sgt. H. Cannon, Royal Field Artillery (Lancaster)
Spr. J. Cantwell, Royal Engineers (Clonmel)
L. Cpl. E. T. Cape, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (N. Kensington)
Pte. A. Capewell, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Heath Town)
Pte. J. Capp, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Brighton)
Sgt. J. H. Carlin, Cameron Highlanders (Tendon)
Pte. J. Carr, Durham Light Infantry (Spennymoor)
Spr. J. Q. Carroll Royal Engineers (Sykes Holt)
Pte. H. Carter, Lincolnshire Regiment (Louth)
L. Cpl. O. R. Cartwright Lincolnshire Regiment (Louth)
L. Cpl. G. H. Cartwright, South Staffordshire Regiment (Bloxwich)
L. Cpl. J. E. Carver, Dorsetshire Regiment (Wavertree)
Cpl. W. H. Cash, Royal Field Artillery (Walsall)
Gnr. W. J. Cash, Royal Field Artillery (Denmark Hill, London)
L. Cpl. W. Casley, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (St. Just)
Pte. V. S. Cassarley, West Yorkshire Regiment (Bradford)
Pte. W. Cassidy, Gordon Highlanders (Glasgow)
L. Cpl. E. Casson, Royal Engineers (Lowick)
Bombr. J. Casson, Royal Field Artillery (Portobello)
Sgt. A. E. Castle, Royal Field Artillery (Stamford Street, London)
Pte. F. Castle, West Riding Regiment (Huddersfield)
Bombr. C. Caswell, Royal Marine Field Artillery (Wolverhampton)
Pte. J. Cathey, Northumberland Fusiliers (Newcastle)
Cpl. J. S. Catley, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bristol)
Pte. W. W. Cattell, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (Deanshanger)
Sgt. J. W. Catterrall, East Lancashire Regiment (Haslingden)
Sgt. C. Cavanagh, Gordon Highlanders (Maud)
L. Cpl. E. Cave, Suffolk Regiment (Chatteris)
Sgt. W. E. Cave, Northumberland Fusiliers (Sheffield)
Pte. J. Caulfield, West Riding Regiment (Keighleigh)
Pte. A. Cawkwell, Machine Gun Corps (Four Stones)
Pte. J. Chadwick, Manchester Regiment (Wigan)
L. Sgt. F. E. Chamberlain, Coldstream Guards (Upton Park, London)
Pte. F. Chandler, Royal Sussex Regiment (Petworth)
Sgt. A. Chapman, Royal Engineers (Leeds)
Pte. H. Chapman, Grenadier Guards (Hintmore)
Pte. J. Chard, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bristol)
Gnr. E. Chapman, Royal Field Artillery (Epping)
Pte. J. H. Charlton, Machine Gun Corps (Euston Square, London)
Pte. M. Charlton, Coldstream Guards (Elswick)
Pte. W. Charlton, West Yorkshire Regiment (Sunderland)
Sgt. W. Chatterley, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Walsall)
Pte. A. Cheshire, Coldstream Guards (Widnes)
Act. Sgt. T. W. Chesson, Royal West Kent Regiment (Edenbridge)
Cpl. A. E. Chew, Royal Field Artillery (Portsmouth)
Cpl. H. Childs, Machine Gun Corps (Newmarket)
Pte. H. Childs, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment
Wheeler-Cpl. W. J. Childs, Royal Field Artillery (Seaham Harbour)
Sgt. J. A. Christopher, Lincolnshire Regiment (Grimsby)
Pte. W. Church, RAMC (Birmingham)
Pte. C. A. Clare, Norfolk Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Company (Watford)
Sgt. H. J. Claridge, Royal Field Artillery (Southleigh)
L. Cpl. C. Clark, East Yorkshire Regiment (Hull)
Pte. C. C. Clark, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Croydon)
Sgt. E. W. T. Clark, Royal Field Artillery (Princes Risboro)
Pte. F. Clark, Lincolnshire Regiment (Wisbech)
Pte. F. G. Clark, RAMC (Bristol)
Bombr. G. Clark, Royal Field Artillery (Auckenleck)
Sgt. G. Clark, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Atherstone)
Pte. G. H. Clark, Royal Sussex Regiment (Brighton)
Gnr. T. Clark, Royal Field Artillery (Leeds)
Pte. J. H. Clark, Bedfordshire Regiment (Buntingford)
Cpl. R. Clarke, Border Regiment (Coventry) (Leeds)
Pte. G. Clarke, South Staffordshire Regiment (Leicester)
Sgt. H. Clarke, Royal Field Artillery (Wigan)
Sgt. J. W. Clarke, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Pte. S. H. Clarke, Suffolk Regiment (Ipswich)
Gnr. T. Clarke, Royal Field Artillery (Tipton)
Pte. T. W. Clarke, Royal Scots (Rotherham)
Cpl. W. Clarke, Army Service Corps (Stratford-on-Avon)
Pte. W. Clarke, Coldstream Guards (Glazebury)
Cpl. W. Clarke, Royal Field Artillery (Dunmow)
L. Cpl. F. Clay, Devonshire Regiment (Southsea)
Pte. A. Clayton, Coldstream Guards (Wakefield)
Pte. W. G. Cleeve, Hampshire Regiment (Bishop Waltham)
Dvr. W. H. Cleaver, Royal Field Artillery (Bow, London)
Cpl. F. M. Clegg, Coldstream Guards (Eastrickley)
Pte. H. Clegg, Grenadier Guards (Accrington)
Pte. F. W. Clements, York & Lancaster Regiment (Walkley)
Sgt. A. Cliff, Lincolnshire Regiment (Lincoln)
Pte. W. Cliff, RAMC (Barnsley)
Cpl. C. G. Clifford, Royal Engineers (Mickley)
Pte. G. Clifton, Royal West Kent Regiment (Holesworth)
Bombr. F. T. Clinch, Royal Field Artillery (Brentford)
Pte. J. Chapman, Border Regiment (Keswick)
Pte. J. Clough, Northumberland Fusiliers (Low Walker)
Pte. A. W. Clow, Suffolk Regiment (Holbrook)
Pte. V. A. Clow, Devonshire Regiment (Exeter)
Pte. W. D. Clowes, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Sutton-in-Ashfield)
Sgt. T. Cobner, Labour Corps (Pontnewydd, Mon.)
Pte. A. H. F. Cochrane, Gordon Highlanders (Irvine)
Pte. W. Cochrane, Gordon Highlanders (Dundee)
Pte. J. J. Coffey, Yorkshire Light Infantry (South Elmsall)
Dvr. S. Cohen, Royal Field Artillery (Shoreditch, London)
Pte. N. C. Cole, West Riding Regiment (Mossley) (Chesterfield)
Pte. T. Collier, Manchester Regiment (Failsworth)
Pte. F. P. L. Coles, Hampshire Regiment (North Waltham)
Bombr. W. H. Coles, Royal Field Artillery (Northampton)
Dvr. J. Christie, Royal Field Artillery (Saltcoats, N.B.)
Pte. E. College, Yorkshire Regiment (Murton Colliery)
Spr. W. J. Collett, Royal Engineers (Burton-on-Trent)
L. Cpl. H. J. Collier, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Uttoxeter)
Pte. T. W. Collier, Royal Scots (New Zealand)
Pte. T. Collier, Manchester Regiment (Failsworth)
Pte. J. Collins, Devonshire Regiment (Barnstaple)
Pte. T. Collier, Coldstream Guards (Tonge Moor)
Capt. C. H. Colls, Northumberland Fusiliers (Stechford)
L. Cpl. J. Collins, South Staffordshire Regiment (Wolverhampton)
Act. Sgt. A. F. Connelly, Machine Gun Corps (Shoreditch)
L. Cpl. C. Connolly, Royal Engineers (Omagh)
Sgt. J. Connelly, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Greenock)
Pte. S. Constable, Worcestershire Regiment (Willenhall)
Pte. H. Constantine, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Sheffield)
Cpl. T. Constantine, West Riding Regiment (Clapham)
Sgt. M. Conway, Worcestershire Regiment (Kidderminster)
Sgt. T. Conway, York & Lancaster Regiment (Sheffield)
Dvr. A. A. Cook, Royal Field Artillery (Plumstead, London)
Pte. E. Cook, Honourable Artillery Company (Chelsea)
Pte. T. Cook, Durham Light Infantry (Wingate)
Sgt. T. Cooke, Royal Field Artillery (Eastbridge)
Cpl. W. Coombs, Royal Field Artillery (Old Kent Road, London)
Gnr. A. Cooper, Royal Field Artillery (Darwen)
Pte. A. A. Cooper, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Avon Dasset)
Pte. M. F. Cooper, RAMC (Ramsgate)
L. Cpl. R. J. Cooper, RAMC (Leeds)
Cpl. T. Cooper, Machine Gun Corps (Holbeck)
Sgt. R. Cooper, Hampshire Regiment (Winkfield)
Sgt. W. C. Cooper, Royal Engineers (Brading, Isle of Wight)
Cpl. W. H. Cooper, Royal Engineers (Blackburn)
Sgt. A. R. Cordingley, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Chatham)
Cpl. H. Cordwell, Border Regiment (Manchester)
Pte. F. Corker, Cheshire Regiment (Northwich)
Pte. G. Cormack, Seaforth Highlanders (Alness)
Gnr. C. Corrigan, Royal Garrison Artillery (Wexford)
Pte. F. Cosgrove, Cameron Highlanders (Dundee)
Spr. H. Cosgrove, Royal Engineers (Morestead)
Dvr. M. Costello, Royal Field Artillery (E. Dublin)
Pte. E. Coulton, Grenadier Guards (Lower Ince)
Pte. J. Cowell, Labour Corps (East Ham, London)
Pte. W. Cowlard, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Oxted)
Sgt. J. Cowles, South Staffordshire Regiment (West Bromwich)
Sgt. A. L. Cox, Grenadier Guards (London)
Pte. E. H. Cox, Suffolk Regiment (Outwell)
Gnr. P. S. Cox, Royal Garrison Artillery (Ashby-de-la-Zouch)
Pte. W. Cox, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
Gnr. J. Coyle, Royal Field Artillery (Southampton)
L. Cpl. G. E. Crack, Royal Engineers (Harrow)
Dvr. G. F. Cracknell, Royal Field Artillery (Kilburn, London)
Sgt. C. T. Craddock, South Staffordshire Regiment (Walsall)
Cpl. P. Craig, Royal Highlanders (Pirnmill, Arran)
Pte. A. Craik, Royal Highlanders (Brechin)
L. Cpl. C. W. Craker, Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Pte. M. Crampton, West Riding Regiment (Golcar)
Bombr. H. Cranham, Royal Field Artillery (Liverpool)
Dvr. J. Crawford, Royal Field Artillery (Edinburgh)
Pte. H. S. Cribb, Northumberland Fusiliers (Fishbourne)
Cpl. R. Cristie, RAMC (Glasgow)
Pte. R. J. E. Crosland, RAMC (Todmorden)
Sgt. W. F. Cross, Royal Field Artillery (Walworth, S.B.)
Dvr. A. E. Cross, Royal Field Artillery (Battersea, London)
L. Cpl. G. E. Crouchen, Machine Gun Corps (Fritton)
L. Cpl. W. H. Croucher, Royal Engineers (Dartford)
Pte. J. Cruickshanks, Royal Scots (Edinburgh)
Sgt. F. Cryer, West Riding Regiment (Keighley)
Pte. R. Cude, East Kent Regiment (Wandsworth, London)
Pte. A. Culley, West Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Bombr. W. Cummings, Royal Field Artillery (Seaton Delaval)
L. Cpl. S. Cunliffe, Machine Gun Corps (Eagley)
Spr. F. W. Cunningham, Royal Engineers (Sheffield)
Spr. J. A. Cunningham, Royal Engineers (Willesden, London)
Sgt. R. Curry, Machine Gun Guards (Hemsworth)
Pte. B. A. Curtis, Norfolk Regiment (Beccles)
Pte. T. R. Curtis, Lincolnshire Regiment (Lincoln)
Pte. W. G. Curtis, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Beachampton)
Sgt. W. Cusack, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Manchester)
Gnr. W. J. Cutler, Royal Field Artillery (King's Heath)
Pte. E. D. Cutts, Norfolk Regiment (Fakenham)
Sgt. F. H. D. Dack, Norfolk Regiment (Nordelph)
Pte. M. K. Dady, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Wendover)
Pte. R. Daglish, Durham Light Infantry (Lancaster)
Pte. J. Dakin, Shropshire Light Infantry (Maccleefield)
L. Cpl. H. Daley, Seaforth Highlanders (Manchester)
Bombr. R. S. Dalley, Royal Field Artillery (Northam)
Gnr. J. Daly, Royal Garrison Artillery (Cork)
Gnr. P. Darcy, Royal Field Artillery (Higginstown)
Spr. H. J. Davenport, Royal Engineers (Thronford)
Sgt. J. Davenport, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Aston)
Pte. W. A. Davey, Lincolnshire Regiment (Appleby)
Sgt. R. Davidson, Gordon Highlanders (Peterculter)
Gnr. W. S. Davidson, Royal Field Artillery (Edinburgh)
Sgt. R. Davie, Royal Scots (Edinburgh)
Pte. A. Davies, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bolton)
Pte. G. Davies, Hampshire Regiment (Wolverhampton)
Pte. J. Davies, Shropshire Light Infantry (Cleobury Mortimer)
L. Sgt. B. Davis, Royal West Kent Regiment (Poplar)
Spr. B. H. Davis, Royal Engineers (Tewkesbury)
Pte. W. E. Davison, T. R. Battalion, attd. Machine Gun Corps (South Emsall)
Pte. C. J. Dawes, Royal Sussex Regiment (Hertford)
Sgt. T. W. Dawson, Royal Garrison Artillery (New Shieldon)
L. Cpl. S. W. Day, Suffolk Regiment (Ipswich)
Pte. J. Dean, Liverpool Regiment (Short Heath)
Pte. R. H. Dean, Grenadier Guards (Hanley, Staffs.)
L. Cpl. V. E. T. Deeprose, Royal Sussex Regiment (Westham)
Gnr. C. T. Deighton, Royal Garrison Artillery (Birmingham)
Dvr. F. Dellow, Royal Field Artillery (Barkway)
Dvr. R. Dempster, Royal Field Artillery (Port Glasgow)
Cpl. E. Denison, Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
L. Cpl. M. S. S. Dennett, Royal Sussex Regiment (Eastbourne)
Sgt. T. K. Dennis, Leicestershire Regiment (Donisthorpe)
Gnr. P. C. Desborough, Royal Garrison Artillery (Burton-Laysars)
Sgt. A. Dey, King's Own Scottish Borderers (E. Aberdeen)
Pte. S. E. Dicken, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
Pte. J. Dickenson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Lemington-on-Tyne)
L. Cpl. J. Dickie, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Penicuik)
Sgt. G. Dickson, Seaforth Highlanders (Edinburgh)
Gnr. G. L. Diggins, Royal Field Artillery (Kilburn, London)
L. Cpl. A. Dignam, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Pte. J. Dillon, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Coatbridge)
L. Cpl. F. Dinnage, Machine Gun Corps. (Hurstpierpoint)
Pte. A. W. Dix, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Pangbourne)
L. Cpl. M. Dixon, Shropshire Light Infantry (Gelli Rhondda)
Act. Cpl. R. Dixon, Lancashire Fusiliers (Heywood)
Pte. T. A. Dixon, Suffolk Regiment (Rivershead)
L. Cpl. V. Dixon, West Riding Regiment (Haworth)
Pte. H. Dobbs, Coldstream Guards (Dronfield)
Cpl. Wheeler E. Dobson, Royal Field Artillery (Tyne Dock)
Pte. F. Docherty, West Riding Regiment (Halifax)
Spr. W. G. Dodd, Royal Engineers (Lavendon)
Pte. W. Dodds, Seaforth Highlanders (Edinburgh)
L. Cpl. W. Dodds, Durham Light Infantry (Gateshead)
S. Smith Cpl. W. B. Dodds, Royal Field Artillery (Gateshead)
Pte. G. E. Doe, Royal West Kent Regiment (Redgrave, Diss)
Pte. C. Doherty, Irish Guards (Derrybeg)
Pte. H. Doherty, RAMC (Bolton)
Sgt. H. Dolby, Royal Engineers (Peterboro)
Pte. W. Donaldson, Gordon Highlanders (Montrose)
Pte. A. E. Donbavand, Shropshire Light Infantry (Stockport)
Bombr. H. Donbavand, Royal Field Artillery (Stockport)
L. Cpl. J. Donelly, Royal Scots (Bellsquarry, Calder)
Dvr. D. Donkin, Royal Engineers (Newbigg-in-by-Sea)
Pte. J. Donnelly, RAMC (Arklow)
Pte. J. Donoghue, Devonshire Regiment (Castleton)
Pte. J. Doolan, Irish Guards (Tullow, County Carlow)
Pte. F. D. Douglas, Army Cyclist Corps (Bideford)
Dvr. L. A. Doust, Royal Field Artillery (Westcliffe-on-Sea)
Gnr. L. J. Doust, Royal Garrison Artillery (Witton, Birmingham)
Pnr. W. Dowding, Royal Engineers (E. Bath)
Pte. T. Downes, Leicestershire Regiment (Market Harborough)
Dvr. W. Downey, Royal Field Artillery (Athy)
Pte. G. G. Downs, York & Lancaster Regiment (Hull)
Cpl. R. C. Doyle, Honourable Artillery Company (Trinidad)
L. Cpl. F. J. Draper, Devonshire Regiment (Stratton St. Margaret)
L. Sgt. E. Drew, Machine Gun Corps (Cheltenham)
Pte. G. Drew, Devonshire Regiment (Gittisham)
Pte. P. Drinkwater, Grenadier Guards (Llangarren)
Pte. J. Duff, Irish Guards (Skerries)
Sgt. E. Duffy, Liverpool Regiment (Manchester)
Pte. J. Duke, York & Lancaster Regiment (Rotherham)
L. Cpl. R. Duke, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Stonehouse)
Cpl. J. F. Duley, Royal Field Artillery (Midhurst)
Cpl. F. Duncan, Royal Engineers (Tayport)
Pte. H. Dunkley, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Towcester)
Cpl. G. Dunn, Yorkshire Regiment, attd. Trench Mortar Battery (Ferryhill)
Pte. H. Dunn, North Staffordshire Regiment (Hanley)
Cpl. C. Dunning, South Wales Borderers (Nantyglo, Mon.)
Pte. J. Dunningham, Royal Sussex Regiment (W. Bergholt)
Sgt. J. A. Dunsmore, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Castlecary)
2nd Cpl. P. C. Durnford, Royal Engineers (Birkenhead)
Pte. A. Dutiton, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Blackburn)
Cpl. A. Duxbury, Manchester Regiment (Blackpool)
Pte. L. Cpl. G. Dyker, Gordon Highlanders (Auchendoer)
Sgt. W. Eager, Royal Engineers (Llandudno)
Pte. R. Eastwood, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Stacksteads)
Pte. A. Easy, Suffolk Regiment (Downham Fen, Isle of Ely.)
Pte. T. Edgar, Northumberland Fusiliers (Usworth)
Sgt. J. Edge, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Birkenhead)
Pte. A. G. Edwards, Durham Light Infantry (Petersfield)
Pte. G. R. Edwards, South Staffordshire Regiment (Penkridge)
Cpl. H. J. Edwards, Royal Field Artillery (E. Dorchester)
Pte. R. Edwards, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
L. Cpl. T. Eccles, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Skerton)
L. Cpl. W. Eley, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Sgt. H. F. Ellen, Royal Engineers (Tufnell Park)
L. Cpl. J. Elliot, Royal Engineers (Edinburgh)
Dvr. C. C. E. Elliott, Royal Field Artillery (Doncaster)
L. Cpl. C. Ellis, Essex Regiment (Westcliff)
Dvr. C. V. Ellis, Royal Field Artillery (Tottenham)
Cpl. F. B. Ellis, Northamptonshire Regiment (Kettering)
Pte. H. E. Ellis, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Hyde)
Sgt. J. Ellis, East Yorkshire Regiment (Bridlington)
Sgt. L. Ellis, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Stoke-on-Trent)
Pte. J. Ellwood, Bedfordshire Regiment (Cambridge)
L. Cpl. W. Elphick, Royal Sussex Regiment (Herstmonceux)
L. Cpl. E. E. Emery, Military Foot Police (South-sea)
Dvr. E. England, Royal Field Artillery (Allerton by Water)
Pte. R. A. England, Grenadier Guards (West Buckland)
Pte. F. Entwistle, RAMC (Oswaldtwistle)
L. Cpl. D. L. Evans, Royal Engineers (Southport)
Pte. E. J. Evans, Dorsetshire Regiment (Walsall)
Sgt. H. H. Evans, Royal Field Artillery (Newport, Mon.)
Pte. H. S. Evans, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Ruabon)
Sgt. H. V. Evans, West Yorkshire Regiment (Fenton)
L. Cpl. J. L. Evans, Royal Engineers (Caerphilly)
Pte. R. W. Evans, Liverpool Regiment (Port Dinorwic)
Pte. S. Evans, Gloucestershire Regiment (Dumbleton)
Dvr. S. Evans, Royal Field Artillery (Bangor)
Sgt. S. E. Evans, Worcestershire Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. T. Evans, Cheshire Regiment (Middlesbrough)
Pte. T. H. Evans, Irish Guards (Hammersmith, London)
Sgt. W. Evans, Lancashire Fusiliers (E. Chesterfield)
Gnr. W. Evans, Royal Field Artillery (Ontario, Canada)
Sgt. W. Evans, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Westanstowe)
Sgt. R. C. Everett, Royal Field Artillery (Alderford)
Sgt. R. C. Ewell, Grenadier Guards (Putney, London)
Pte. G. A. Extall, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Arnold)
Pte. C. P. Eyles, Devonshire Regiment (Walworth, London)
Sgt. F. Fairclough, Royal Field Artillery (Darwen)
Cpl. J. Farley, Labour Corps (Bingley)
Cpl. I. H. Farmer, Royal Sussex Regiment (Heathfield)
Pte. J. W. Farmery, Gordon Highlanders (Buttershaw)
Cpl. A. W. Farr, Hampshire Regiment (Bournemouth)
L. Cpl. W. Farrow, Leicestershire Regiment (Nelson)
Pte. B. Faulkner, Royal Sussex Regiment (Upton)
Pte. S. Fearn, RAMC (Birmingham)
Pte. J. Feeney, Lancashire Fusiliers (Burnley)
Cpl. G. F. Fellows, Royal Field Artillery (Handsworth)
Cpl. H. C. Fells, Machine Gun Corps (Crofton Park)
Pte. I. Fells, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (London)
Sgt. H. G. Fenemore, Machine Gun Corps (Penge)
Pte. E. Fenwick, Yorkshire Light Infantry (York)
Dvr. W. G. Ferry, Royal Field Artillery (Bethnal Green, London)
Pte. F. Fever, Royal West Kent Regiment (Maidstone)
Sgt. C. W. Fewell, Machine Gun Corps (Chelmsford)
Pte. C. F. Field, RAMC (Horeham)
Pte. E. Field, West Riding Regiment (Huddersfield)
Pte. H. Field, West Riding Regiment (Huddersfield)
Dvr. G. Y. Firth, Royal Field Artillery (Newton Heath)
Dvr. R. Fisher, Royal Field Artillery (Bridgefoot)
Pte. T. H. Fisher, Worcestershire Regiment (Cleeve)
Pte. S. G. Fitch, Grenadier Guards (Great Wakering)
Pte. M. J. Fitzgerald, Irish Guards (Kilteely, County Limerick)
Pte. J. Flaherty, North Staffordshire Regiment (Batley)
Pte. F. Fleming, Machine Gun Guards (Salisbury)
Dvr. G. T. Fleming, Royal Field Artillery (Sunderland)
Pte. J. Fleming, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Glen Craig)
Sgt. N. Fleming, Royal Engineers (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Pte. J. Fletcher, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (E. Whitehall)
Pte. J. W. Fletcher, Lincolnshire Regiment (Crowland)
Sgt. S. Flitcroft, West Riding Regiment (Halifax)
L. Sgt. E. Flynn, East Surrey Regiment (Streatham)
Pte. J. C. Foale, Devonshire Regiment (Plymouth)
Cpl. T. Fogarty, Machine Gun Corps (Urlingford)
L. Cpl. A. Forbes, Gordon Highlanders (Aberdeen)
Pte. A. Ford, East Surrey Regiment (Ringwood)
Sgt. A. Ford, Royal Field Artillery (Portsmouth)
L. Cpl. R. H. Ford, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Shardlow)
L. Cpl. A. Fordham, Suffolk Regiment (Cambridge)
L. Cpl. E. J. Foreman, Lancashire Fusiliers (Stockton-on-Tees)
Spr. J. Forrest, Royal Engineers (Edinburgh)
Pte. R. Forster, Coldstream Guards (Bridport)
Pte. J. Forsyth, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Coatbridge)
Dvr. F. Foster, Royal Field Artillery (E. Norbury)
Pte. H. S. Foster, RAMC (Wood Green)
Cpl. J. Foster, Royal Field Artillery (New Cleethorpes)
Sgt. W. Foster, West Riding Regiment (Oldham)
Pte. A. Fotheringham, Royal Scots Fusiliers (Perth)
Gnr. A. Foulkes, Royal Field Artillery (Four Crosses)
Pte. T. Foulkes, Machine Gun Corps (Hulme)
L. Cpl. C. Fowler, Royal Sussex Regiment (Brighton)
Cpl. W. Fowler, Hertfordshire Regiment (Hemel Hempstead)
Pte. R. J. Fox, Royal Scots (E. Everton)
Pte. T. Fox, Manchester Regiment (Heywood)
Cpl. W. Foy, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Kirkintilloch)
Sgt. E. A. Framp, London Regiment (East Dulwich)
Pte. W. L. Francis, RAMC (Woodford)
Pte. F. Frank, RAMC (Hull)
Pte. T. Frankum, South Staffordshire Regiment (Reading)
L. Cpl. E. Fredricksen, West Riding Regiment (Keighley)
Spr. F. Freeman, Royal Engineers (Camberwell)
L. Cpl. H. A. French, RAMC (Ashburton)
Pte. R. W. French, Northumberland Fusiliers (Trimdon Grange)
Pte. E. Frost, West Riding Regiment (Bradford)
Pte. F. Frost, West Riding Regiment (East Dereham)
Cpl. G. Frost, Royal Field Artillery (Norwich)
Pte. J. T. Frost, Leicestershire Regiment (Northampton)
Sgt. R. J. Frost, Hampshire Regiment (Alton)
Spr. R. J. Fry, Royal Engineers (Plymouth)
Pte. M. Furlong, Irish Guards (Killinick)
Pte. Petty Officer C. Furze, East Surrey Regiment (Lambeth, London)
Pte. H. W. Gaby, Lancashire Fusiliers (Edgware Road, London)
Sgt. S. Gaines, Royal Field Artillery (Ilkley)
Pte. J. Galbraith, Royal Scots Fusiliers (Ayr)
Pte. A. Galer, A.B.C. (Paddington)
Pte. B. W. Gallop, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Horfield)
Cpl. J. W. Gamble, Yorkshire Regiment (Guisboro-Cleveland)
Pte. J. Gardiner, Lancashire Fusiliers (Blackburn)
Cpl. F. Gardner, RAMC (W. Kensington)
L. Cpl. W. Gardner, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Birmingham)
Pte. C. Garland, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Stourbridge)
L. Cpl. J. Garland, Lincolnshire Regiment (Sutton-on-Trent)
Spr. J. Garner, Royal Engineers (Fennoy)
Dvr. W. Garner, Royal Field Artillery (Leicester)
Pte. G. F. Garratt, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Derby)
Pte. H. Garratt, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Atherstone)
Cpl. C. R. Garrett, RAMC (Eastleigh)
Pte. J. Gaskell, Lancashire Fusiliers (Middleton Junction)
Cpl. H. Gasson, Royal Engineers (St. Leonards-on-Sea)
L. Cpl. J. R. Gates, South Staffordshire Regiment (Hednesford)
Cpl. W. J. Gates, Royal Field Artillery (Kentish Town, London)
Act. Bombr. D. H. Gavin, Royal Field Artillery (Birmingham)
Sgt. J. W. Gaze, Leicestershire Regiment (Rearsby)
Cpl. H. J. Geary, Machine Gun Corps (Farnboro)
Pte. W. Geary, Middlesex Regiment (Ringwood)
Pte. H. Gee, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Staveley)
Cpl. H. T. Geere, Royal Engineers (Hove)
Pte. H. Geeves, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Houghton)
L. Cpl. J. S. Gelling, Royal Engineers (Onsham, Isle of Man)
Gnr. C. H. George, Royal Garrison Artillery (Birmingham)
Dvr. H. Gething, Royal Field Artillery (Brixton Hill, London)
Pte. G. Gibb, Leicestershire Regiment (Nuneaton)
Gnr. E. Gibberd, Royal Field Artillery (Bournemouth)
Sgt. F. Gibbs, Machine Gun Corps (Ampthill)
Sgt. E. Gibson, Royal Engineers (Birmingham)
Sgt. J. Gibson, Royal Field Artillery (Keighley)
Gnr. W. H. Gibson, Royal Garrison Artillery (Bedlington)
L. Cpl. D. Gilfillan, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (St. Ninians)
Sgt. A. Gill, Royal Field Artillery (Hull)
Pte. A. Gill, Cheshire Regiment (Stockport)
Dvr. W. E. Gill, Royal Field Artillery (Burnley)
Pte. J. Gillan, Yorkshire Regiment (North (Ormesby)
Cpl. M. Given, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Cpl. D. Gladwell, Royal Field Artillery (East Ham)
Tpr. W. A. Glass, Household Battalion (Acton)
Sgt. A. Glaze, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Croydon)
Sgt. E. Gledhill, York & Lancaster Regiment (Pogmoor)
Act. Cpl. J. Glen, Royal West Kent Regiment (Beckenham)
Pte. W. Glen, Seaforth Highlanders (Arbroath)
Pte. J. G. Godden, Royal West Kent Regiment (Edmonton)
Spr. W. E. Godfrey, Royal Engineers (Bristol)
Pte. W. H. Godfrey, Royal Warwickshire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Company (Fulham, London)
Gnr. W. H. J. Godfrey, Royal Field Artillery (S. Woodford)
Sgt. S. F. Godley, Royal Field Artillery (Peckham)
Pte. C. E. Golden, RAMC (Homefield)
Pte. E. Golding, Military Foot Police (Bensham)
Cpl. C. Goldsby, Royal Field Artillery (Birmingham)
Pte. T. G. Goldsmith, Army Cyclist Corps (Tufnell Park)
Pte. E. Gomme, Gloucestershire Regiment (Gravesend)
L. Cpl. W. G. Goodacre, Rifle Brigade (Stapleford)
L. Cpl. J. Goodenough, Royal Berkshire Regiment (Wallingford)
Pte. A. Gooderham, Suffolk Regiment (Bury St. Edmunds)
Spr. C. W. Goodridge, Royal Engineers (Salisbury)
Dvr. S. W. Goodyer, Royal Field Artillery (Islington, London)
Pte. M. N. Goold, Army Service Corps (Worcester, U.S.A.)
Sgt. T. R. Goring, Royal Field Artillery (Clapton, London)
Dvr. A. Gorman, Royal Field Artillery (Plumstead, London)
Pte. F. Gough, Machine Gun Corps (South-Molton)
L. Sgt. P. J. Goult, Honourable Artillery Company (Wanstead)
Gnr. J. Goward, Royal Field Artillery (New Tredegar)
L. Sgt. A. C. Grabham, Devonshire Regiment (Tylorstown)
Pte. M. Grace, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Nenagh)
Pte. H. Graham, West Riding Regiment (Huddersfield)
Sgt. T. Grain, Royal Garrison Artillery (London)
Sgt. E. Grainger, Coldstream Guards (Tadby)
Sgt. R. Grange, Royal Engineers (Ballyclare)
Pte. J. Grant, West Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Sgt. M. Grant, Cameron Highlanders (Edinburgh)
Pte. T. Graves, Highland Light Infantry (Govan)
Cpl. A. Gray, Royal Field Artillery (Glasgow)
Pte. C. S. Gray, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Rochdale)
L. Cpl. H. A. Gray, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Canning Town)
Petty Officer R. A. Gray, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Gateshead-on-Tyne)
Cpl. S. G. Gray, Royal West Kent Regiment (Battersea)
Sgt. W. Gray, Royal Scots Fusiliers (Beith)
Cpl. A. Green, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bromyard)
Pte. C. H. Green, Coldstream Guards (Gillingham)
Cpl. E. Green, East Surrey Regiment (Chorley Wood)
Gnr. G. Green, Royal Field Artillery (Dover)
Pte. G. Green, West Riding Regiment (Brierley Hill)
Cpl. H. Green, York & Lancaster Regiment (Rotherham)
Bombr. P. Green, Royal Garrison Artillery (Cardiff)
Pte. T. A. Green, Lincolnshire Regiment (Leicester)
Pte. W. E. Green, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Normanton)
Cpl. W. H. Green, Northamptonshire Regiment (Rothwell)
Pte. J. Greenlaw, Durham Light Infantry (New Washington)
Spr. F. Greenwood, Royal Engineers (Hawksclough)
Gnr. W. Greenwood, Royal Garrison Artillery (Bunley)
Dvr. H. Gregg, Royal Field Artillery (Bethnal Green)
Gnr. L. L. Gregory, Royal Field Artillery (West Croydon)
Pte. T. Gregson, Liverpool Regiment (Saskatchewan)
Cpl. A. Grieve, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Auchtermuchty)
Pte. D. Grieve, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Glasgow)
Pte. W. Grieve, Gordon Highlanders (Motherwell)
Pte. E. Griffin, Machine Gun Corps (E. Bedminster)
2nd Cpl. E. A. Griffin, Royal Engineers (Greet)
Sgt. W. Grimes, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Lancaster)
Pte. H. Grindley, Grenadier Guards (Tarvin)
L. Cpl. W. R. Grose, Devonshire Regiment (St. Austell)
Pte. J. W. Grundy, Hampshire Regiment (Walsall)
Pte. J. T. Guest, Liverpool Regiment (Dudley)
L. Cpl. G. H. Guildford, Royal Sussex Regiment (Brighton)
Dvr. J. A. Gulley, Royal Field Artillery (Dewsbury)
Cpl. J. Gunter, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Bristol)
Sgt. A. H. Gunton, Royal Engineers (Queens Park, London)
Cpl. F. W. Gurr, London Regiment (Clapham)
Pte. A. Guthrie, Northumberland Fusiliers (Walker-on-Tyne)
L. Cpl. R. Guttridge, Royal Sussex Regiment (Hastings)
Cpl. G. T. Gwilt, RAMC (Wolverhampton)
Pte. A. Hadcroft, Coldstream Guards (Haslingden)
Sgt. W. G. Hagger, Royal Field Artillery (Bromley, London)
Sgt. A. Hall, Royal Field Artillery (Southwark, London)
Gnr. J. R. Hall, Royal Garrison Artillery (Birmingham)
Pte. J. T. Hall, Machine Gun Corps (Shoppington)
Pte. N. A. Hall, West Yorkshire Regiment (King's Cross, London)
Sgt. R. W. Hall, York & Lancaster Regiment (Washington)
Pte. T. Hall, South Staffordshire Regiment, attd. Royal Engineers (Wednesbury)
L. Cpl. L. A. Halladay, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Balsall Heath)
Pte. A. Halliwell, RAMC (Ince)
Pte. G. Halsey, Bedfordshire Regiment (Hemel Hempstead)
Dvr. H. Halstead, Royal Field Artillery (Birstall)
Pte. J. Hamilton, Gordon Highlanders (Uddingston)
Pte. W. Hammond, Lancashire Fusiliers (Leeds)
2nd Cpl. H. Hampson, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Cpl. W. H. Hance, Shropshire Light Infantry (Tooting)
Pte. C. Hankin, Army Service Corps (Farningham)
Spr. J. Hardie, Royal Engineers (Kintore)
Pte. W. G. Hardiman, Middlesex Regiment (St. Pancras)
Sgt. C. Harding, West Riding Regiment (Keighley)
Dvr. C. R. Harding, Royal Field Artillery (Streatham, London)
Sgt. J. Harding, Northumberland Fusiliers (Riding Mill)
Gnr. T. H. Harding, Royal Field Artillery (Brockley, London)
Pte. P. Hardisty, Seaforth Highlanders (New Milnes)
Sgt. J. Hardwick, York & Lancaster Regiment (Hollinsend)
Cpl. W. H. Hardy, Labour Corps (Mountsorrel)
Pte. J. Harfield, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Littlehampton)
2nd Cpl. G. E. Hargreaves, Royal Engineers (E. Preston)
Spr. J. Harker, Royal Engineers (West Hartlepool)
Cpl. G. Harkes, Royal Garrison Artillery (Dundee)
Pte. W. J. Harmer, Essex Regiment (Kentish Town)
L. Cpl. J. H. Harper, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (St. Austell)
Bombr. T. Harper, Royal Field Artillery (Wolverhampton)
Sgt. H. F. Harpham, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Selston)
Cpl. of H. H. J. Harrington, Household Battalion (Uxbridge)
Pte. A. C. M. Harris, Devonshire Regiment (Barn-staple)
Cpl. C. Harris, Royal West Kent Regiment (Lewisham)
Pte. G. E. Harris, Royal West Kent Regiment (Bermondsey)
Cpl. T. Harris, Irish Guards (Paddington)
Sgt. W. Harris, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Pte. W. Harris, Military Mounted Police (Walsall)
Pte. W. R. Harris, Cheshire Regiment (Blackburn)
Pte. A. Harrison, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Hull)
Drummer A. Harrison, Middlesex Regiment (Peckham)
Sgt. C. G. Harrison, Dorsetshire Regiment (Poole)
Pte. J. Harrison, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Ashbourne)
Sgt. W. Harrison, Royal Field Artillery (Leicester)
Pte. H. Harrop, Lancashire Fusiliers (Whitefield)
Act. Sgt. F. J. Hart, Royal West Kent Regiment (Sydenham)
Pte. P. Hart, Border Regiment (Wigan)
Pte. G. Hartle, Worcestershire Regiment (Bromsgrove)
Spr. F. M. Hartley, Royal Engineers (Bradford)
Pte. C. Hartshorne, Grenadier Guards (Alfreton)
Pte. E. Hartshorne, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Burton-on-Trent)
Pte. D. Harvie, Scots Guards (Fauldhouse, N.B.)
L. Sgt. J. Harvey, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Birmingham)
Pte. W. J. Harvey, Norfolk Regiment (Barnsbury)
Spr. J. Haston, Royal Engineers (Shotts)
Dvr. B. Hatch, Royal Field Artillery (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Sgt. G. Hatchley, Royal West Kent Regiment (Pinner)
Pte. H. Hawker, Devonshire Regiment (Axminster)
Pte. B. Hawkins, Machine Gun Corps (Luton)
Sgt. C. H. Hawkins, Leicestershire Regiment (Loughboro)
Pte. D. C. Hawksby, Gordon Highlanders (Glasgow)
Pte. F. Hawley, RAMC (Derby)
Sgt. W. E. Haworth, Royal Field Artillery (Oswaldtwistle)
Spr. W. H. Hawson, Royal Engineers (Shirebrook)
Pte. G. Hay, Northumberland Fusiliers (Bedlington)
2nd Cpl. S. F. Hayes, Royal Engineers (South Shields)
Pte. E. Haynes, RAMC (Hunsley)
Pte. H. Haynes, South Staffordshire Regiment (West Bromwich)
Pte. H. H. Haynes, RAMC (Godalming)
Sgt. B. Hazle, West Riding Regiment (Halifax)
Sgt. G. Head, Royal Garrison Artillery (Newbury)
Sgt. T. Heal, Machine Gun Corps (Eastwood)
Pte. A. Heaney, Army Cyclist Corps (Newcastle)
L. Cpl. A. E. Hemming, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Alcester)
Sgt. W. C. Hender, Royal Field Artillery (Liverpool)
Spr. A. Henderson, Royal Engineers (Harrogate)
Pte. D. Henderson, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (West Calder)
Pte. B. Henderson, Royal Highlanders (Buckhaven)
Pte. T. Henderson, RAMC (Dundee)
Gnr. W. Hepplewhite, Royal Field Artillery (S. Shields)
Bombr. J. Herbert, Royal Field Artillery (Pimlico, London)
Dvr. A. V. E. Herrich, Royal Field Artillery (West Ham)
Sgt. W. Hewitt, Machine Gun Corps (Ferryhill)
Act. L. Cpl. G. Heydenrick, Machine Gun Corps (Cape Town, South African)
Pte. H. T. Heyward, Devonshire Regiment (Tiverton)
Pte. J. L. Higgins, Devonshire Regiment (S. Hackney)
2nd Cpl. H. High, Royal Engineers (Ashford, Middlesex)
Cpl. C. Highton, East Yorkshire Regiment (HuB)
Pte. J. H. Higson, Border Regiment (Leigh)
Pte. C. Hill, Suffolk Regiment (Bredfield)
Pte. E. Hill, Manchester Regiment, attd. Light Trench Mortar Battery (St. Helens)
Pte. J. Hill, Northumberland Fusiliers (Newcastle)
Sgt. B. M. Hill, Grenadier Guards (Nottingham)
Sgt. T. H. Hill, Royal Field Artillery (Selby Park)
Cpl. W. Hill, Royal Field Artillery (Pliuastead, London)
Cpl. F. W. Hillman, Cheshire Regiment (Aspull)
Pte. B. Hilton, Border Regiment (Heaton Park)
Pte. S. Hincks, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
Sgt. W. Hindley, Grenadier Guards (Leigh)
Pte. A. E. Hindrey, Norfolk Regiment (Norwich)
Pte. F. Hinkler, York & Lancaster Regiment (Sheffield)
L. Cpl. H. Hinkley, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Duffield)
Cpl. H. Hinton, Royal Garrison Artillery (Birmingham)
Sgt. A. P. Hipkin, York & Lancaster Regiment (Beeston)
L. Cpl. J. W. Hird, West Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Pte. W. B. Hirst, West Riding Regiment (Bradford)
L. Cpl. W. Hobbs, Hampshire Regiment (Bassett)
Pte. G. Hobden, Lancashire Fusiliers (Clapton Park)
Pte. A. E. Hobson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Hornsea)
Pte. L. Hodgson, Yorkshire Regiment (Danby)
Pte. S. Hodkinson, Shropshire Light Infantry (Stockport)
Cpl. H. Hodson, Royal Engineers (Willesden)
Sgt. H. JB. Hogg, RAMC (Croydon)
Dvr. D. Hogwood, Royal Field Artillery (Maze Pond, London)
Pnr. H. Holbroofe, Royal Engineers (Wakefield)
Dvr. G. Holden, Royal Field Artillery (Darwen)
Pte. T. Holden, Coldstream Guards (Nelson)
Pte. W. H. Holden, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Blackburn)
Pte. C. Holland, Gloucestershire Regiment (Leyton)
Dvr. T. H. Holla, Royal Field Artillery (Greetland)
Pte. F. J. Hollier, RAMC (Bristol)
L. Sgt. J. Hollis, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Liverpool)
Pte. B. H. Holloway, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Alford)
Cpl. A. G. Hollyoake, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (Stony Stratford)
Cpl. H. Holmes, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Birmingham)
Gnr. J. T. Holmes, Royal Field Artillery (Canning Town, London)
Pte. G. Holt, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Derby)
L. Cpl. B. Holt, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Henley-in-Arden)
Cpl. H. Homer, Machine Gun Corps (E. Manchester)
Pte. H. Homewood, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Hailing, Kent)
Dvr. E. Hook, Army Service Corps (Woodhouse)
Pte. G. Hook, West Riding Regiment (Bingley)
M. S. Hookway, Royal Flying Corps (Bideford)
Pte. H. C. M. Hooper, RAMC (Darlington)
Pte. J. Hooson, Lancashire Fusiliers (Pendleton)
Cpl. J. Hope, Royal Field Artillery (Durham)
Sgt. B. N. Hope, Durham Light Infantry (Fencehouses)
Cpl. S. Hope, Machine Gun Corps (Heaton)
L. Sgt. J. B. Hopkins, Devonshire Regiment (Rhondda)
Pte. J. Horan, Irish Guards (Enfield, County Meath)
Cpl. J. Home, Royal Field Artillery (Solehull)
Pte. A. Homer, West Yorkshire Regiment (Ripon)
Gnr. G. Hornibrook, Royal Field Artillery (S. Kensington, London)
Pte. J. Horridge, Lancashire Fusiliers (Lower Broughton)
Gnr. S. Horton, Royal Field Artillery (Wolverhampton)
Pte. C. H. Hoskins, Gloucestershire Regiment (Boscombe)
Spr. B. Houghton, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Dvr. R. Howard, Royal Field Artillery (Southend)
Dvr. S. Howard, Royal Field Artillery (Ashton-upon-Lyne)
Pte. F. Howarth, West Riding Regiment (Halifax)
Sgt. G. A. Howarth, Royal Field Artillery (Radcliffe)
Pte. L. P. D. Howarth, Coldstream Guards (Leicester)
Sgt. F. J. Howe, Border Regiment (Baldock)
Sgt. J. Howe, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Coventry)
Pte. J. E. Howe, West Yorkshire Regiment (Bradford)
Pte. W. Howker, West Riding Regiment (Keigh
Pte. C. Howlett, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Islington, London)
Cpl. R. C. Howley, Royal Field Artillery (Leytonstone, London)
Able Seaman J. T. Hoyle, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Beamish)
Bombr. S. J. Huett, Royal Field Artillery (Stratford, London)
Pte. C. A. Hughes, Shropshire Light Infantry (Hereford)
Cpl. E. Hughes, Royal Fusiliers (W. Baling)
L. Cpl. F. Hughes, Royal Engineers (Horsham)
Dvr. F. Hughes, Royal Field Artillery (Mexico)
Sgt. H. W. Hughes, Border Regiment (Eltham)
Cpl. T. Hull, Northumberland Fusiliers (Leyton)
Sgt. G. Hulse, Royal Engineers (Hulme)
L. Cpl. L. Hunneybell, Hampshire Regiment (Aldershot)
Pte. A. E. W. Hunt, Essex Regiment (Shoeburyness)
Cpl. A. S. Hunt, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Cpl. F. Hunt, Cheshire Regiment (Northwich)
Pte. J. J. Hunt, Irish Guards (Milford Haven)
Pnr. S. A. Hunt, Royal Engineers (Old Kent Rd., London)
Sgt. W. Hunt, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Spr. J. Hunter, Royal Engineers (Jarrow)
Sgt. J. W. Hunter, Northumberland Fusiliers (Gateshead)
Sgt. J. Hurley, Royal Field Artillery (Westcliff-on-Sea)
Pte. H. Hurworth, Durham Light Infantry (Saltburn-by-Sea)
Cpl. H. J. Hutchings, London Regiment (Leytonstone)
Pte. J. Hutchings, Royal Sussex Regiment (Midhurst)
Pnr. J. Hutchinson, Royal Engineers (Butterknowle)
Pte. J. Hutchison, Royal Highlanders (Edinburgh)
L. Cpl. P. R. Hutchings, Gordon Highlanders (Dorset)
Pte. G. A. Hynard, Bedfordshire Regiment (Hadleigh)
Pte. H. Hynes, West Riding Regiment (Marsden)
Gnr. R. Ibbotson, Royal Garrison Artillery (Finsbury Park, London)
Pte. W. Illingworth, Lancashire Fusiliers (Staleybridge)
Sgt. T. W. Ingham, Grenadier Guards (Northampton)
Pte. J. H. Ingleby, Yorkshire Regiment (Wheatley Hill)
Pte. A. E. Ingles, Royal West Kent Regiment (Oulton Broad)
Sgt. A. Inglis, West Yorkshire Regiment (Gateshead-on-Tyne)
Bombr. J. Inman, Royal Field Artillery (Grassington)
Act. Cpl. W. Irving, Royal Engineers (Seaham Colliery)
Pte. A. Jackson, Rifle Brigade (Bow E.)
Pte. J. Jackson, Coldstream Guards (Hartlepool)
Cpl. J. Jackson, Lincolnshire Regiment (Spalding)
Dvr. J. H. Jackson, Royal Field Artillery (Edmonton, London)
Pte. J. W. Jackson, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Bramley)
Pte. J. W. Jackson, Yorkshire Regiment (Middlesbrough)
Sgt. S. Jackson, Leicestershire Regiment (Leeds)
Pte. T. Jackson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Woolton)
Pte. W. Jackson, London Regiment (Hampstead Road, London)
Pte. W. Jackson, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Sgt. P. C. Jacob, Rifle Brigade (Notting Hill)
Spr. S. T. Jacobs, Royal Engineers (King's Lynn)
Pte. E. Jacques, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Chesterfield)
Pte. J. Jakins, Leicestershire Regiment (Chesterfield)
Sgt. H. James, Machine Gun Corps (Southend-on-Sea)
Gnr. D. W. Jardine, Royal Field Artillery (South Shields)
Pte. T. F. Jarrett, Royal West Kent Regiment (Tonbridge)
Pte. G. Jarvis, RAMC (Worcester)
L. Cpl. W. E. Jarvis, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Kidderminster)
Sgt. W. J. Jauncey, Royal Garrison Artillery (Birmingham)
Sgt. A. Jeacock, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Coventry)
Pte. G. Jefferson, Gordon Highlanders (Burton-on-Trent)
Pte. A. J. Jeffries, Suffolk Regiment (Sudbury)
Pte. J. Jeffries, Northumberland Fusiliers (Horden)
L. Sgt. G. Jeffs, Lancashire Fusiliers (Parkgate)
Sgt. F. Jenkins, Shropshire Light Infantry (Smetbwick)
Pte. W. S. Jenkins, RAMC (Brixton)
Pte. P. Jenkinson, York & Lancaster Regiment (Sheffield)
Cpl. G. Jenner, Royal West Kent Regiment (Tunbridge-Wells)
L. Cpl. B. Jennings, West Riding Regiment (Wolfverhampton)
Sgt. P. C. Jennings, Royal Field Artillery (East Dulwich, London)
Pte. A. B. Johnson, Norfolk Regiment (Harleston)
Sgt. C. Johnson, Lancashire Fusiliers (Birmingham)
Spr. F. Johnson, Royal Engineers (Hammersmith)
Pte. H. Johnson, East Surrey Regiment (Walton-on-Thames)
Pte. T. Johnson, Machine Gun Corps (Bolton)
Pte. W. F. Johnson, West Yorkshire Regiment (Monk Fryston)
Cpl. H. Johnston, Bedfordshire Regiment (Epsom)
L. Cpl. R. Johnston, Manchester Regiment (Liverpool)
Dvr. W. Johnston, Royal Field Artillery (Brechin)
Pte. D. M. Johnstons, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Haugh-of-Urr)
Pte. G. D. Johnstone, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Newcastle)
Pte. H. Johnstone, late Royal Scots (Monkton)
Sgt. J. Johnstone, Gordon Highlanders (Maghoa)
Gnr. A. Jones, Royal Garrison Artillery (Malvern)
Dvr. B. Jones, Royal Field Artillery (Glyncarriog)
Sgt. B. Jones, South Staffordshire Regiment (Sedgeley)
Pnr. C. E. Jones, Royal Engineers (Madley)
Pte. D. Jones, Lancashire Fusiliers (Abergele)
Bombr. D. O. Jones, Royal Field Artillery (Clapham, London)
Pte. F. R. Jones, Worcestershire Regiment (Dudley)
Cpl. O. Jones, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Pwllheli)
Pte. R. Jones, Norfolk Regiment (Bethnal Green)
Spr. R. Jones, Royal Engineers (Church Stretton)
L. Cpl. R. Jones, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Llanrwst)
Pte. R. Jones, Leicestershire Regiment (Sutton-in-Ashfield)
Dvr. S. Jones, Royal Field Artillery (Bilston)
Cpl. T. Jones, Royal Engineers (Charlbury)
Pte. W. Jones, South Staffordshire Regiment (Brierley Hill)
Boinbr. W. Jones, Royal Field Artillery (Wolverhampton)
Spr. W. J. Jones, Royal Engineers (Rhynmey)
Pte. W. J. Jones, Honourable Artillery Company (Treffgarne)
Spr. A. H. Jordan, Royal Engineers (Plymouth)
Act. Bombr. C. Jordan, Royal Garrison Artillery (Sutton)
L. Cpl. J. T. Jordan, Rifle Brigade (East Ham)
L. Cpl. G. Joule, Cheshire Regiment (Stalybridge)
Pte. C. Joyce, Machine Gun Guards (Bolton)
L. Cpl. E. Joynes, West Riding Regiment (Sheffield)
Act. Cpl. G. A. Joynes, Labour Corps (Barwick-in-Elmet)
Dvr. J. E. Just, Royal Field Artillery (Shap)
L. Cpl. H. Kane, West Riding Regiment (Lochore)
Pte. H. Kane, Irish Guards (Ashford, County Wicklow)
Pte. H. A. V. Kattau, London Regiment (Stockwell)
Sgt. H. Kay, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Pte. P. Keane, Royal Scots Fusiliers (Bonnybridge)
L. Sgt. P. Kearney, Irish Guards (Belfast)
Pte. C. Keeling, South Staffordshire Regiment (Deepfields)
Dvr. D. Keenan, Royal Field Artillery (Valleyfield, Fife)
Pte. T. Keenan, Seaforth Highlanders (Lochee)
Gnr. M. Keighley, Royal Field Artillery (Bolton)
Pte. V. Keily, RAMC (Stradbally)
Pnr. T. Kelly, Royal Engineers (E. Manchester)
Spr. G. Kelly, Royal Engineers (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Pte. J. Kelsall, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Manchester)
Cpl. T. P. Kenny, Irish Guards (Dublin)
Bombr. H. G. Kent, Royal Field Artillery (Hove)
Pnr. K. A. O. Kenward, Royal Engineers (Heathfield)
Sgt. A. Kenyon, West Riding Regiment (Huddersfield)
Cpl. W. F. Kermode, Coldstream Guards (Peel)
Act. Bombr. J. W. Kershaw, Royal Field Artillery (Oldham)
Gnr. W.J. Kerton, Royal Garrison Artillery (Shepton Mallet)
Cpl. J. W. Key, Royal Sussex Regiment (Long Eaton)
Pte. A. B. Kibble, Middlesex Regiment (New Cross)
L. Cpl. E. Kidger, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Leicester)
Pte. A. Kilkenny, Irish Guards (Derryclagh)
Pte. A. King, Bedfordshire Regiment (Bedford)
Pte. E. S. G. King, Royal West Kent Regiment (S. Norwood)
L. Cpl. E. T. King, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Cambridge)
Spr. J. King, Royal Engineers (West Hartlepool)
Sgt. J. King, Border Regiment (Kendal)
Spr. F. Kirby, Royal Engineers (Chesterfield)
Pte. C. Kirk, Lancashire Fusiliers (Staines)
Pte. W. Kirkham, Shropshire Light Infantry (Whitchurch, Salop)
Sgt. J. Kite, Royal Field Artillery (Curbridge)
Pte. W. Kitely, Bedfordshire Regiment (Arlesey)
Pte. W. Knight, South Staffordshire Regiment (Codicote, Welwyn)
Pte. A. Knowles, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Tibshelf)
Pte. F. H. C. Kunz, Suffolk Regiment (Forest Gate)
Cpl. E. A. Kynaston, Shropshire Light Infantry (Ellesmere)
Pte. J. Lacey, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
Cpl. W. Laidlaw, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Hawick)
Pte. G. Laing, Labour Corps (Aberdeen)
L. Cpl. J. W. Lake, Lincolnshire Regiment (Grimsby)
Sgt. W. Lake, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (Woodford-Halse)
Pte. J. Lakin, South Staffordshire Regiment (Atherstone)
Cpl. E. Lamb, Northumberland Fusiliers (Hordon Colliery)
Gnr. H. Lamble, Royal Field Artillery (Kingsbridge)
Cpl. T. Lancashire, Lancashire Fusiliers (Oldham)
Sgt. S. Langley, Royal Field Artillery (East Greenwich)
Sgt. F. E. Langrish, London Regiment (East Ham)
Cpl. H. F. Lansley, London Regiment (Tottenham)
Pte. W. Latham, Manchester Regiment (St. Helens)
L. Cpl. H. W. Lattimore, Machine Gun Corps (Hull)
Pte. J. Lavelle, Irish Guards (Inneskea, Belmullet)
Pte. M. Lavery, Royal Scots Fusiliers (Glasgow)
L. Sgt. J. Law, Coldstream Guards (Smethwick, Staffs.)
Cpl. G. B. A. Lawes, Lancashire Fusiliers (Dartmouth)
Cpl. F. E. Lawrence, Royal West Kent Regiment (Shoreham-by-Sea)
Dvr. J. Lawrence, Royal Field Artillery (llyhope)
Cpl. E. H. Laws, Yorkshire Regiment (Ryhope)
Sgt. C. Lawson, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Coventry)
Pte. F. Laycock, West Riding Regiment (Brighouse)
Pte. A. E. Lea, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Gnr. F. Lea, Royal Field Artillery (Wednesbury)
Pte. J. Leach, Gordon Highlanders (Chorley, Lancaster)
Pte. H. V. Lee, Norfolk Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. E. Leech, Grenadier Guards (Pulford)
Pte. E. Leech, Lancashire Fusiliers (Alderley Edge)
Act. Sgt. W. Leggatt, Gordon Highlanders (Paisley)
Sgt. J. A. Leggett, Norfolk Regiment (Norwich)
Pte. W. C. Leggott, Welsh Regiment (Cambridge)
Cpl. H. Leitch, Royal Field Artillery (Dunoon)
2nd Cpl. A. Leith, Royal Engineers (Limerick)
Pte. A. V. Lemon, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Weymouth)
Cpl. A. Leonard, Royal Field Artillery (Mildenhall)
L. Cpl. D. Leonard, Yorkshire Regiment (Bishop Auckland)
Sgt. J. Leonard, Lancashire Fusiliers (Billinge)
L. Cpl. M. Leonard, Northumberland Fusiliers (Burnhope)
Pte. E. C. Leslie, Border Regiment (Battersea)
Pte. S. Levi, Machine Gun Corps (E. Whitehall)
Dvr. D. W. Lewis, Royal Field Artillery (Llandebie)
Sgt. E. E. Lewis, Royal Field Artillery (Pembroke)
Pte. H. Lewis, Worcestershire Regiment (Bromsgrove)
Cpl. J. W. Lewis, Lancashire Fusiliers (Swiriton)
L. Cpl. A. S. Leybourne, Military Foot Police (Chesterton)
Pte. F. Liddiard, Lancashire Fusiliers (Birchvale)
Pte. A. K. Lidgett, Army Service Corps (St. John's Wood)
Sgt. D. Light, Royal Field Artillery (Boston, Lincolnshire)
Sgt. R. Lightfoot, Gloucestershire Regiment (Sharpness)
Pte. J. Liles, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bolton)
Pte. T. Lillie, Northumberland Fusiliers (Blyth)
Pte. F. G. Linder, Suffolk Regiment (Lowestoft)
Pte. H. Lincoln, West Yorkshire Regiment (Hull)
Pte. W. Lines, Northumberland Fusiliers (Walsall)
Cpl. F. J. Linsey, Royal West Surrey Regiment (S. Crpydon)
Cpl. C. W. Linton, Royal Field Artillery (Drury Lane, London)
Pte. H. Lisle, West Riding Regiment (Ashington)
Pte. H. Lister, West Riding Regiment (Woodhouse-Mill)
Pte. T. H. Lister, Manchester Regiment (Rotherham)
L. Cpl. R. G. Liston, Royal Scots (Dornoch)
Pfe H. J. Little, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Walthaanstow)
Bte. T. Little, Royal West Kent Regiment (Writtle)
Cpl. J. Littler, North Staffordshire Regiment (Longton)
Pte. H. Llewellyn, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bristol)
Spr. E. F. Loades, Royal Engineers (Bury St. Edmunds)
Pte. F. Lockwood, York & Lancaster Regiment (Wakefield)
Cpl. F. G. Lodge, RAMC (Bristol)
Dvr. J. Loftus, Royal Field Artillery (Bolton, Lancaster)
Gnr. J. W. Long, Royal Garrison Artillery (Yeadon)
Cpl. B. Lord, York & Lancaster Regiment (Wathon, Dearrie)
Pte. A. Loveland, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Camberley)
Pte. J. Low, Gordon Highlanders (Glasgow)
Bombr. T. Lowther, Royal Field Artillery (Halton)
Pte. E. H. Luff, Royal West Kent Regiment (Battersea Park)
Pte. A. Luke, Devonshire Regiment (Penzance)
L. Cpl. T. Luke, Northumberland Fusiliers (Birtley, County Durham)
Pte. W. Lunn, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. G. Lymer, Coldstream Guards (Kilsby)
Pte. S. Lynn, East Surrey Regiment (E. Dulwich)
Pte. M. Lyons, Lancashire Fusiliers (Southport)
Act. Cpl. F. S. Mabbs, Norfolk Regiment (East Twickenham)
Pte. W. MacAllister, Machine Gun Corps (Ballymena)
L. Cpl. J. Macaulay, Seaforth Highlanders (Kilmarnock)
Pte. C. Macdonald, Seaforth Highlanders (Stornoway)
L. Sgt. A. Mackenzie, Cameron Highlanders (Skye)
Pte. R. Mackie, York & Lancaster Regiment (South Shields)
Pte. A. Mackintosh, London Regiment (Hoxton)
Pte. H. G. Macklen, Lancashire Fusiliers (Staines)
Gnr. P. A. Macnamara, Royal Field Artillery (Dundee)
Pte. H. MacTaggart, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Dailly)
Sgt. T. Magee, Lancashire Fusiliers (Eccles)
Pte. E. Maguire, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Glasgow)
Dvr. F. Maguire, Royal Field Artillery (Hamilton)
Pte. B. Maiden, Machine Gun Corps (Wollaston)
L. Cpl. J. A. Main, Seaforth Highlanders (Findhorn)
L. Cpl. D. Mair, Gam. Higihrs. (Nairn)
L. Cpl. N. F. Maker, Devonshire Regiment (Bere
Pte. P. Malkin, Leicestershire Regiment (Burbage)
Cpl. J. Maloney, Machine Gun Corps (Galway)
Bombr. T. D. Malsbury, Royal Field Artillery (Moxley)
Spr. C. F. Malyon, Royal Engineers, fmly, RAMC (Thorney)
Bombr. J. M. Mann, Royal Field Artillery (Carlisle)
Dvr. W. R. Mann, Army Service Corps (Bayswater)
Pte. E. Manning, Suffolk Regiment (North Stow)
Pte. E. Mannng, Royal West Kent Regiment (Orpington)
Sgt. C. Mannion, Machine Gun Corps (Collyhurst)
Spr. A. H. March, Royal Engineers (Bath)
Pte. W. H. March, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Kimberley)
Pte. F. Marchant, Devonshire Regiment (Ottery St. Mary)
Pte. E. J. Marchant, Worcestershire Regiment (Salisbury)
L. Cpl. R. Markham, West Yorkshire Regiment (Sheffield)
Pte. T. Markham, Lincolnshire Regiment (Grimsby)
Bombr. J. Marlow, Royal Field Artillery (Merton Abbey, London)
Pte. J. Marner, RAMC (Dunadry)
Spr. W. Marriott, Royal Engineers (Wellingborough)
Sgt.F. Marsh, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bristol)
Pte. V. J. Marsh, Rifle Brigade (Fulham)
Spr. W. Marsh, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Pte. E. Marshall, Rifle Brigade (Elland)
Pte. W. F. Marshall, RAMC (Bradford)
Cpl. (, Sergeant) T. Marston, Leicestershire Regiment (Loughborough)
Pte. A. W. Martin, RAMC (Bosham)
Pte. C. A. Martin, RAMC (Derby)
Pte. D. Martin, Machine Gun Corps (Kingston)
Dvr. G. Martin, Royal Field Artillery (Burgess Hill)
Pte. J. Martin, Labour Corps (Newcistle-on-Tyne)
Sgt. J. W. Martin, Army Service Corps (Manor Park)
Cpl. N. Marian, Royal Engineers (Jarrow)
Cpl. R. S. W. Martin, Lincolnshire Regiment (Chaudlersford)
2nd Cpl. S. G. Martin, Royal Engineers (Balham, London)
Pte. C. Mason, Royal Sussex Regiment (Clare, Suffolk)
Sgt. E. Mason, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. F. Mason, Machine Gun Corps (Whixley)
Pte. G. Mason, West Riding Regiment (Caton)
Sgt. J. H. Mason, Royal Engineers (Sheffield)
Sgt. A. Masson, Royal Field Artillery (E. Elgin)
Sgt. F. Masters, Royal Sussex Regiment (Battle)
Pte. H. V. Matlock, Leicestershire Regiment (Shepshed)
Sgt. J. Mafetey, Royal Field Artillery (Winkfield)
Cpl. of H. E. C. Matthews, Household Battalion (Leicester)
Drummer H. Matthews, Middlesex Regiment (Lower Clapton, London)
Pte. S. Matthews, West Riding Regiment (Howarth)
Cpl. T. H. Matthtews, RAMC (Exeter)
Fitter Staff Sergeant B. J. Mate, Royal Field Artillery (Nottingham)
Sgt. H. J. Maule, Machine Gun Corps (Tiddington)
Act. Cpl. T. A. Maw, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Gainsborough)
Cpl. E. Mawbey, Grenadier Guards (Willesden, London)
Pte. V. May, Royal West Kent Regiment (Waterford)
Cpl. R. H. Mayson, Royal Field Artillery (Keswick)
Sgt. H. G. McCabe, Coldstream Guards (Smethwick)
Cpl. R. McConnell, Irish Guards (Larne)
Cpl. A. McDonald, Norfolk Regiment (Poplar, London)
Pte. H. McDonald, RAMC (Glasgow)
Able Seaman J. McDonald, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Aberdeen)
Cpl. H. A. McDonnell, Leicestershire Regiment (Loughborough)
Pte. W. McFadyen, Royal Highlanders (Methil)
Pte. A. McGhee, Labour Corps (Glasgow)
L. Cpl. J. McGoldrick, York & Lancaster Regiment (St. Ninians)
Pte. J. McGregor, Gordon Highlanders (Glasgow)
Dvr. F. McGuire, Royal Field Artillery (West Hartlepool)
Pte. F. McHugh, Machine Gun Guards (Drumkeirn)
Sgt. D. McIntyre, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Kerrera)
Sgt. D. McIver, Seaforth Highlanders (Inverness)
Pte. J. McKay, Seaforth Highlanders (Forres)
Pte. R. McKellan, Army Service Corps (Alberta, Can.)
Pte. R. McKenzie, Seaforth Highlanders (Dumfries)
Cpl. J. McLaren, Royal Highlanders (Fernigair)
Pte. M. McLean, Gordon Highlanders (Dundonnell by Garve)
Pte. R. McLean, RAMC (Lochgelly)
L. Cpl. R. McLellan, Seaforth Highlanders (Kirkcudbright)
Pte. J. McLeod, Gordon Highlanders (Glasgow)
Cpl. J. McMahon, Royal Sussex Regiment (Coventry)
Pte. M. McMahon, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Chesterfield)
L. Cpl. T. McMahon, Royal Highlanders (Boness)
Pte. J. McManus, Northumberland Fusiliers (East Cramlington)
Pte. T. H. McMinemy, West Riding Regiment (Caledon)
L. Cpl. A. M. McNeill, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Lochgilphead)
Sgt. A. McNulty, Gordon Highlanders (Hamilton)
Pte. P. McNulty, Irish Guards (Ballyjamesduff)
Sgt. J. McQuade, Labour Corps (Glasgow)
Pte. D. McQuarrie, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Greenock)
Pte. W. McQueen, RAMC (Edinburgh)
L. Cpl. A. McWilliams, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Glasgow)
Sgt. G. Meadows, West Yorkshire Regiment (Byker, Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Sgt. J. R. Mean, Machine Gun Corps (Seaham Harbour)
Sgt. P. Mearns, Gordon Highlanders (Aboyne)
Gnr. A. J. Mears, Royal Garrison Artillery (Hoxton)
Sgt. J. Mears, Royal Field Artillery (Haggerston)
Cpl. P. Meechan, Royal Field Artillery (Edinburgh)
Pte. A. Meen, Royal West Kent Regiment (Northfleet)
SjB. W. Meer, Royal Field Artillery (Ilkeston)
Pte. T. Meeres, Northumberland Fusiliers (Hoxton)
Pte. L. Meggit, York & Lancaster Regiment (Kilnhurst)
Pte. G. Melcalfe, West Riding Regiment (Bradford)
Pnr. W. Mellars, Royal Engineers (Rotherham)
Dvr. J. B. Melling, Royal Field Artillery (Preston)
Pte. A. H. Mendes, Rifle Brigade (Trinidad)
Gnr. N. A. Menzies, Royal Field Artillery (Leith)
Cpl. H. S. Merriman, West Riding Regiment (Battyeford)
Gnr. N. B. Merritt, Royal Field Artillery (Leeds)
Sgt. H. Metcalfe, Machine Gun Corps (York)
Pte. J. Metcalfe, West Riding Regiment (Keigh
L. Cpl. G. L. Mettam, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Stapleford)
Pte. W. J. Middleditch, Grenadier Guards (Maldon, Essex)
Pte. A. R. Middleton, Machine Gun Corps (Aston)
Spr. D. J. Middleton, Royal Engineers (Deptford, London)
L. Cpl. W. Middleton, West Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Pte. J. P. Miles, Royal West Kent Regiment (Penge)
Pte. G. Miller, Machine Gun Corps (Whitehaven)
Gnr. R. H. Miller, Royal Garrison Artillery (Sale, Cheshire)
Pte. W. G. Millington, RAMC (Shrewsbury)
Gnr. J. Millmore, Royal Field Artillery (Tantobie)
Cpl. G. D. Mills, Royal Engineers (Norwich)
Pte. J. Mills, Yorkshire Regiment (Sunderland)
Pte. J. A. Mills, Machine Gun Corps (Huddersfield)
L. Cpl. R. Mills, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (Yardley)
Pte. W. Mills, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Sheffield)
Pte. H. Millson, West Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Pte. W. Millward, Worcestershire Regiment (Bewdley)
Pte. A. Milne, Royal Scots (Edinburgh)
Pte. J. Milne, Manchester Regiment, attd. Royal Engineers (Rochdale)
Pte. C. Mitchell, Army Service Corps (Sowerby Bridge)
Gnr. C. Mitchell, Royal Garrison Artillery (E. Arbroath)
Spr. C. W. Mitchell, Royal Engineers (Sandbach)
Sgt. C. W. Mitchell, Royal Marine Field Artillery (Doncaster)
Pte. J. Mitchell, Gordon Highlanders (Greenock)
Pte. P. Mitchell, Gordon Highlanders (Hill of Beath, Fife)
L. Cpl. R. Mole, Northumberland Fusiliers (Cullercoats)
Sgt. B. Monaghan, Royal Field Artillery (Leeds)
L. Cpl. D. Monk, Cameron Highlanders (Benbecula)
Pte. E. Monkhouse, Yorkshire Regiment (Notting Hill)
Spr. R. B. Moody, Royal Engineers (Bishop Auckland)
Sgt. A. J. Moore, Royal Garrison Artillery (Sandgate)
Pte. T. Moore, South Staffordshire Regiment (Pelsall)
Cpl. W. Moralee, Northumberland Fusiliers (Byker)
Pte. J. Moreland, Gordon Highlanders (Edinburgh)
Gnr. G. J. E. Morgan, Royal Field Artillery (Roseville, Coseley)
Pte. J. H. Morgan, Northumberland Fusiliers (North Shields)
Pte. T. Morgan, Lancashire Fusiliers (Warrington)
Pte. A. Moring, Royal West Kent Regiment (Clapton)
Cpl. F. L. Morley, Royal Fusiliers (Sudbury)
Gnr. R. W. Morley, Royal Field Artillery (Lower Tooting)
Sgt. T. Morley, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Derby)
Pte. J. G. Morrice, Gordon Highlanders (Tarland)
Able Seaman A. R. Morris, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Laugharne)
Sgt. B. Morris, Royal Field Artillery (Swansea)
Pte. D. Morris, Northumberland Fusiliers (Dunston-on-Tyne)
Dvr. G. Morris, Royal Field Artillery (Edmonton)
B.Q.M. Sgt. W. Morris, Royal Field Artillery (Tinbury Wells)
L. Cpl. W. Morris, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Hyde)
L. Cpl. W. G. Morris, Seaforth Highlanders (London)
Pte. W. J. P. Morris, Honourable Artillery Company (Welshpool)
Pte. G. D. Morrison, RAMC (Aberdeen)
L. Cpl. P. Morrison, Royal Highlanders (Bankfoot)
Pte. A. Moss, East Surrey Regiment (Southfields)
Cpl. J. Mould, Northumberland Fusiliers (South Shields)
Spr. C. E. Mounsley, Royal Engineers (Darlington)
Pte. A. Mountfprd, RAMC (Bashford)
Pte. E. Moxon, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Pontefract)
Pte. J. Moyes, Royal Highlanders (Duufermline)
Dvr. A. Muir, Royal Field Artillery (Edinburgh)
Pte. C. Mumford, Hampshire Regiment (Ware Park)
Pte. I. Murphy, Royal Scots (Glasgow)
L. Cpl. F. S. Murray, Middlesex Regiment (Walthamstow)
Dvr. G. A. Murray, Royal Field Artillery (Chesterle-Street)
Bombr. J. G. Murray, Royal Field Artillery (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Pte. K. Murray, Seaforth Highlanders (Alness)
Bombr. F. Musgrove, Royal Field Artillery (Leeds)
Pte. W. Musgrove, West Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Pte. S. Musselbrook, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Dulwich)
Dvr. E. Naven, Royal Field Artillery (Birmingham)
Pte. E. Naylor, York & Lancaster Regiment (Sheffield)
Pte. J. H. Naylor, West Riding Regiment (Halifax)
Gnr. A. Neaversonr Royal Garrison Artillery (Burton-on-Trent)
Pte. J. Nelson, Royal Highlanders (Edinburgh)
Pte. J. W. Nelson, West Riding Regiment (Barnsley)
Pte. H. Nevard, Essex Regiment (Colchester)
Pte. J. Newall, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Manchester)
C.Q.M.S. W. C. Newberry, Devonshire Regiment (Exeter)
L. Cpl. F. Newcombe, Dorsetshire Regiment (Hatherleigh)
Sgt. C. Newland, RAMC (Wrexham)
L. Cpl. A. Newlands, Manchester Regiment (Horwich)
Sgt. A. H. Newman, Royal Field Artillery (E. Gloucester)
Pte. H. Newman, Grenadier Guards (Kingsdown)
Pte. S. Newman, Royal Sussex Regiment (Wimbledon)
L. Cpl. A. H. Newson, Yorkshire Regiment (Norwich)
Cpl. T. P. Newton, Royal Field Artillery (Guiseley)
Pte. H. Nice, Norfolk Regiment (Fring)
Pte. J. Nicholas, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Claytonle-Moors)
Pte. P. A. Nicholl, Royal Sussex Regiment (Brighton)
L. Cpl. G. H. Nicholls, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Wednesbury)
Pte. E. O. Nicholson, West Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Cpl. F. Nicholson, Lancashire Fusiliers (West Baling)
Pte. R. D. Nicolson, Cameron Highlanders (Skye)
Sgt. W. H. Nightingale, Royal Marine Field Artillery (Hornsey)
Gnr. V. Nikitenko, Royal Garrison Artillery (E. Newton Grange)
Gnr. H. Nimmo, Royal Field Artillery (Glasgow)
Cpl. A. Nixon, East Lancashire Regiment (Burnley)
Sgt. A. Noble, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Kettering)
Pte. R. Noble, Royal Scots Fusiliers (Paisley)
Pte. E. W. Norman, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Spr. W. B. Norman, Royal Engineers (Jarrow)
Pte. G. Norris, Machine Gun Corps (Southampton)
Act. Cpl. H. G. A. Norris, Essex Regiment (Manor Park)
Pte. C. North, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Dockingfield)
L. Sgt. S. C. Nother, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Winchester)
Pte. A. Norton, Coldstream Guards, attd. Machine Gun Guards (Fotherby)
Cpl. R. D. Norwood, Norfolk Regiment (Stonebridge Park, London)
Act. Bombr. A. D. Oakley, Royal Field Artillery (Forest Gate)
Gnr. W. E. Oakley, Royal Field Artillery (York)
Bombr. C. O'Brien, Royal Field Artillery (Tunstall)
Cpl. W. Odd, Royal Engineers (Mereworth)
Pte. G. O'Donoghue, Machine Gun Guards (Slane)
L. Sgt. C. G. O'Kelly, York & Lancaster Regiment (Halifax)
Spr. W. Older, Royal Engineers (Hastings)
Pte. W. A. Oldfield, Gloucestershire Regiment (Walthamstow)
Sgt. J. Oliver, Machine Gun Corps (Bridgworth)
Pte. J. E. Oliver, East Yorkshire Regiment (Tinsley)
Pte. M. O'Neill, Grenadier Guards (Bantry)
Sgt. W. O'Neill, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Sgt. D. H. Ormerod, Royal Lancaster Regiment (E. Manchester)
Spr. A. Orwin, Royal Engineers (Sheffield)
Sgt. J. G. Osborne, Worcestershire Regiment (Birmingham)
Gnr. J. W. Osborne, Royal Field Artillery (Elland)
Act. Bombr. S. Osborne, Royal Garrison Artillery (Great Clacton)
Pte. P. D. Ottley, Army Service Corps (Willesden, London)
Pte. T. H. E. Ovenden, Suffolk Regiment (Plumstead, London)
Dvr. A. W. Owen, Royal Field Artillery (Bermondsey)
Air Mechanic, 1st Class S. Owefl, Royal Flying Corps (Armedale)
Cpl. W. Owen, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Learnington)
Pte. B. Owens, Machine Gun Corps (North Carolina, U.S.A.)
Cpl. E. Oxby, Lincolnshire Regiment (Retford)
Gnr. (Driver) J. Oxby, Royal Garrison Artillery (Lazills)
Cpl. F. Page, Royal Field Artillery (Manchester)
Pte. J. Page, Suffolk Regiment (West Wickham)
Cpl. W. B. Page, Suffolk Regiment (Ipswich)
Gnr. C. H. Pain, Royal Field Artillery (Walworth)
Dvr. W. Pain, Royal Field Artillery (Staines)
Sgt. F. Palmer, Royal Field Artillery (Dorking)
Pte. O. Palmer, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
Pte. J. G. Pardington, Machine Gun Corps (E. Stroud)
Act. Bombr. H. Parfitt, Royal Field Artillery (Old Kent Road, London)
Pte. L. W. Paris, Royal West Surrey Regiment (E. Croydon)
Pte. S. Park, Northumberland Fusiliers (Newcastle)
Pte. J. Parker, Northumberland Fusiliers (Betside Furnace)
Sgt. J. Parker, Royal Field Artillery (Wembley)
Sgt. J. A. Parker, Royal Horse Artillery (Ilford)
Sgt. R. Parker, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Galgate)
L. Cpl. W. Parkin, Lincolnshire Regiment (Mansfield)
L. Cpl. D. Parkinson, Gordon Highlanders (Stackstead)
Pte. A. Parr, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
Sgt. W. H. Parr, South Staffordshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Pte. H. H. Parry, Suffolk Regiment (Walthamstow)
Cpl. E. W. Parsons, Grenadier Guards (Putney, London)
L. Sgt. A. Partridge, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Walsall)
Pte. A. W. Pascoe, Royal Sussex Regiment (Paignton)
Cpl. A. W. Passmore, Worcestershire Regiment (Lower Gornal)
Pte. A. Patchett, Yorkshire Regiment (Bradford)
Pte. E. W. Pateman, Coldstream Guards (Midhurst)
Pte. R. B. Paterson, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Edinburgh)
Pnr. W. Paterson, Royal Engineers (Hawick)
L. Cpl. W. E. Paul, Dorsetshire Regiment (Dorchester)
Pte. A. E. Payne, RAMC (Dover)
Pte. B. W. Payne, Dragoon Guards (Faversham)
Pte. E. Payne, Norfolk Regiment (Great Yarmouth)
Tpr. E. W. Peach, Household Battalion (Bridport)
L. Cpl. A. Peachey, Royal Engineers (Thurstou)
Sgt. C. Peachy, West Riding Regiment (Bradford)
Pte. E. E. Peacock, Northumberland Fusiliers (Belvedere)
Cpl. A. Pearce, Shropshire Light Infantry (Oswes
Bombr. G. Pearce, Royal Field Artillery (Southall)
L. Cpl. J. Pearman, Essex Regiment (Chelsea)
Gnr. A. H. Pearson, Royal Field Artillery (Rotherhithe)
Pte. G. Pearson, West Riding Regiment (Tfaornaby-on-Tees)
Pte. H. Pearson, South Staffordshire Regiment (Wolverhampton)
Cpl. T. Pearson, Grenadier Guards (Manor Park)
Pte. F. J. Peck, Coldstream Guards (Ryde)
Pte. H. Peckham, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Dorchester)
L. Cpl. F. Peel, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Morley)
Gnr. E. J. Pemberthy, Royal Garrison Artillery (Penarth)
Gnr. H. Penlington, Royal Garrison Artillery (Liverpool)
Pte. W. Pepper, East Surrey Regiment (Standon)
L. Sgt. S. Perks, Coldstream Guards (Slough)
L. Cpl. G. Perrin, Machine Gun Corps (Rye)
Pte. W. G. Perren, Machine Gun Corp. (Enfield)
Pte. A. W. Perry, Worcestershire Regiment (Marylelebone)
Pte. J. Perry, Royal West Kent Regiment (Mon.)
L. Sgt. P. R. Perry, Hampshire Regiment (Norwich)
Sgt. W. Peters, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
Cpl. J. Phillingham, Lancashire Fusiliers (Openshaw)
Sgt. E. J. Phillips, London Regiment (Islington)
Pte. W. A. Phillips, Rifle Brigade (Walwtfrth)
L. Cpl. E. J. Philpott, Machine Gun Corps (Eastney)
Spr. G. T. Phizacklea, Royal Engineers (Mitcham)
Cpl. A. C. Pickering, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bolton)
Sgt. G. Pickering, East Lancashire Regiment (Lostock)
Pte. E. Pickles, West Yorkshire Regiment (Bradford)
Gnr. T. Pickup, Royal Field Artillery (Rawtenstall)
Act. L. Cpl. D. Pidgely, Machine Gun Corps (Hurstpierpoint)
Pte. J. F. Pierce, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Brighton)
Spr. F. G. Pilgirem, Royal Engineers (Pritttewell)
Pte. C. Pilgrim, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
Staff Sergeant Fitter E. Pilkington, Royal Field Artillery (Preston)
Pte. J. Pilkington, York & Lancaster Regiment (Barnsley)
Pte. J. Pirret, Gordon Highlanders (Newton Grange)
Sgt. A. G. Pitcher, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Marborough Meadows)
Cpl. E. W. Pitt, Grenadier Guards (Rrightlingsea)
L. Cpl. W. R. Pizzey, West Riding Regiment (Chapeltown, Sheffield)
L. Cpl. C. E. Platt, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
Pte. H. Plowman, Yorkshire Regiment (Malton)
Spr. B. Plows, Royal Engineers (Kippax)
Cpl. C. Plumley, Norfolk Regiment (E. Northampton)
Pte. W. Poile, Royal Sussex Regiment (Rye, Sussex)
Spr. F. P. Poland, Royal Engineers (Worthing)
Lt/Sergeant Pomroy, Suffolk Regiment (Walton)
Pte. A. C. Pook, RAMC (Plymouth)
Gnr. L. E. Poole, Royal Horse Artillery (Coventry)
Cpl. F. V. Pope, Royal Field Artillery (Buxted)
Sgt. S. Pope, Devonshire Regiment (Exmouth)
L. Cpl. B. Porter, Middlesex Regiment (Chadwell Heath)
Tr. H. Porter, Household Battalion (Sleaford)
Sgt. A. J. Portman, Worcestershire Regiment (Netherton);
Pte. T. G. Porton, Coldstream Guards (Horsham)
L. Sgt. R. Potter, Machine Gun Corps (Markgate)
Pte. A. Potter, Royal Scots (Grangepans)
Onr. A. G. Potter, Royal Field Artillery (Wickham Market)
Pte. J. J. Potts, Durham Light Infantry (Coxhoe)
Cpl. T. Potts, Royal Garrison Artillery (Sunderland)
Sgt. W. Poulton, South Staffordshire Regiment (Long Itchington)
Sgt. E. Pounder, Royal Field Artillery (Sunderland)
Gnr. A. J. Powell, Royal Horse Artillery (Goring-on-Thames)
L. Sgt. F. Powell, West Yorkshire Regiment (Bradford)
Gnr. H. Powell, Royal Garrison Artillery (Holywell)
L. Sgt. J. Powell, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Derby)
Pte. J. Powell, East Yorkshire Regiment (South, Bank)
Pte. R. H. Powell, Lincolnshire Regiment (Bethnal Green, London)
Dvr. E. Power, Royal Field Artillery (Castleford)
Pte. L. Pragnell, Hampshire Regiment (Romsey)
L. Cpl. C. Pratt, RAMC (Birmingham)
Pte. E. Pratt, Seaforth Highlanders (St. Andrews, Orkney)
Cpl. G. E. Pratt, Royal Engineers (Norwich)
Cpl. A. M. Precious, Machine Gun Corps (Bilton)
Pte. S. E. Preeee, Shropshire Light Infantry (Condover, Salop)
Sgt. A. Price, Royal Field Artillery (Hunslet)
Pte. E. Price, Devonshire Regiment (Ottery S. Mary)
Sgt. W. Price, RAMC (Brookend)
Air Mechanic, 1st Class A. Prideaux, Royal Flying Corps (Bristol)
Pte. G. E. Prigmore, London Regiment (Barusbury)
Sgt. E. Prime, Machine Gun Corps (Garforth)
Pte. J. A. Prior, Lancashire Fusiliers (Hounslow)
Gnr. W. H. Prior, Royal Field Artillery (E. Gravesend)
Pte. W. J. Pritchard, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Islington, London)
Cpl. T. Proffitt, Royal Field Artillery (Walsall)
Act. Cpl. H. E. Prosser, London Regiment (Bermondsey)
Pte. H. Proudfoot, Yorkshire Regiment (Sunderland)
Pte. F. Prouse Devonshire Regiment (Clovelly)
Sgt.. E. Prowse, Devonshire Regiment (Redruth)
Pte. W. L. Pugh, Grenadier Guards (Ynyshir, Glamorgan)
L. Cpl. F. H. Pullan, Yorkshire Regiment (Halifax)
Pte. H. Pumfrey, Grenadier Guards (Upton-on-Severn)
Pte. J. Purcell, Shropshire Light Infantry (Shrewsbury)
Sgt. D. Purdie, Machine Gun Corps (Edinburgh)
Pte. R. Purdon, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Giffnock)
L. Cpl. H. Purkiss, Hampshire Regiment (Tattenham)
Pte. T. S. Purves, Royal Scots Fusiliers (Edinburgh)
Pte. F. A. Pye, Shropshire Light Infantry (WrockwardineWood)
Gnr. N. Quigley, Royal Garrison Artillery (Cowes, Isle of Wight)
Gnr. J. Quin, Royal Field Artillery (Gateshead-on-Tyne)
Sgt. J. W. Quince, Lincolnshire Regiment (Gainsborough)
Sgt. W. E. Quirk, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Wakefield)
Act. Cpl. G. W. Racey, South Staffordshire Regiment (Wisbech)
L. Cpl. J. Rae, Royal Scots (Linlithgow)
Spr. W. Rae, Royal Engineers (Glasgow)
Sgt. J. Rafferty, South Staffordshire Regiment (Wolverhampton)
Gnr. A. T. Rainbow, Royal Garrison Artillery (East Ham)
Pte. T. Raistrick, West Riding Regiment (Manningham)
Pte. F. E. Ralph, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Cpl. C. Ralphs, Northumberland Fusiliers (Stoke-on-Trent)
Pte. F. Ramsdale, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Pte. A. Ramsden, York & Lancaster Regiment (Sheffield)
Pte. F. Ramsden, Leicestershire Regiment (Mansfield)
Dvr. F. H. Randall, Royal Field Artillery (Manor Park, London)
Gnr. L. Randall, Royal Garrison Artillery (Grantham)
Cpl. F. Rathbone, East Yorkshire Regiment (Seaton Hirst)
Spr. R. Rathbone, Royal Engineers (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
C.Q.M.S. G. J. Rawe, Labour Corps (Nottingham)
Pte. W. Raybould, RAMC (Aston)
Pte. W. G. T. Rayner, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Wandsworth, London)
Pte. H. Raynor, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (New Sawley)
Gnr. H. E. Read, Royal Field Artillery (Leigh-on-Sea)
Cpl. of Horse V. H. Read, Household Battalion (Kilnhurst)
L. Cpl. A. Redall, Military Foot Police (Nechells)
L. Cpl. W. Redhead, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Lancaster)
Pte. P. Redmond, Irish Guards (Ferns, County Wexford)
Sgt. W. Redmor, Yorkshire Light Infantry
Sgt. H. Redpath, Royal Highlanders (Perth)
L. Cpl. J. Regan, London Regiment (Stepney)
Pte. C. Reid, Seaforth Highlanders (Lossiemouth)
Sgt. F. Reid, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Penge, London)
Spr. J. Reid, Royal Engineers (Woolwich)
Pte. J. P. Reid, Machine Gun Guards (Forfar)
Pte. A. Rennison, Lancashire Fusiliers (Tollerton)
Gnr. A. G. Rhodes, Royal Garrison Artillery (Tunbridge Wells)
Gnr. H. Rhodes, Royal Field Artillery (Woodford Green)
Sgt. H. L. Richards, Royal Garrison Artillery (E. Falmouth)
Pte. W. E. P. Richards, Honourable Artillery Company (Marylebone)
Sgt. E. H. Richardson, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Walsall)
L. Cpl. T. Richardson, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Glasgow)
Pte. W. Richardson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Cpl. A. Riddles, Cheshire Regiment Duneton)
Pte. A. Riding, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Manchester)
Pte. A. H. Riley, Royal Scots (Whitefield)
Bombr. H. O. Ripley, Royal Garrison Artillery (E. Liverpool)
L. Cpl. F. W. Rix, Suffolk Regiment (Bungay)
Pte. T. Roach, York & Lancaster Regiment (Barnsley)
Pte. F. Roberts, Leicestershire Regiment (Nuneaton)
Sgt. G. A. Roberts, Leicestershire Regiment (Haggerstone)
Pte. J. J. Roberts, London Regiment (Clapham Common)
Sgt. D. Robertson, Gordon Highlanders (Stirling)
Cpl. J. Robertson, Royal Highlanders (Scone)
Sgt. W. Robertson, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Romford)
Pte. G. W. Robinson, Cameron Highlanders (Linlithgow)
Spr. H. Robinson, Royal Engineers (Hulme)
Sgt. J. Robinson, Yorkshire Regiment (York)
L. Cpl. J. G. Robinson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Darlington)
Pte. S. J. J. Robinson, Grenadier Guards (Bethnal Green, London)
Pte. G. Robson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Witham)
L. Cpl. J. Robson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Addison Colliery, Stella)
Pte. J. Robson, Royal Fusiliers (Whitfield)
Pnr. J. J. Robson, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Pte. R. Roden, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Chorley)
Pte. J. Rodger, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Hawick)
Pte. F. Rodgers, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Sheffield)
Sgt. P. Rodgers, Machine Gun Corps (Huddersfield)
Pte. A. Rogan, Royal Scots (Glasgow)
Pte. C. J. Rogers, RAMC (Abbots Langley)
Pte. G. W. Ronson, Coldstream Guards (Garstang)
Cpl. D. E. Rose, Royal Garrison Artillery (Stratford)
Pte. G. W. Rose, Suffolk Regiment (Chatteris)
Sgt. W. Ross, Royal Field Artillery (Uphall)
Pte. W. Ross, Border Regiment (Annan)
Pte. O. Rossiter, Grenadier Guards (West Monkton)
Gnr. P. Rotherham, Royal Field Artillery (Birkdale)
Pte. J. Rounding, West Riding Regiment (Driffield)
Pte. W. T. Rout, Rifle Brigade (London)
Cpl. J. R. Routledge, Royal Field Artillery (Northallerton)
Sgt. E. J. Rowe, Grenadier Guards (Walthamsfow)
Cpl. R. W. Rowell, Northumberland Fusiliers (Littleburn Colliery)
Gnr. A. H. Rowles, Royal Garrison Artillery (Bedwar)
Bombr. R. Rowntree, Royal Field Artillery (HartJepool)
Sgt. J. Roy, Gordon Highlanders (Lanarkhill)
L. Cpl. L. Royle, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Sgt. W. J. Rumming, Coldstream Guards (Coine, Wiltshire)
Pte. G. Rushforth, Border Regiment (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Pte. J. Rushford, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Avonbridge)
L. Cpl. J. Rushton, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Blackburn)
Pte. G. Russell, Highland Light Infantry (Holytown)
Pte. J. Russell, Cameron Highlanders (Dundee)
Cpl. W. Russell, Royal Field Artillery (South Shields)
Pte. H. Rust, Gordon Highlanders (Aberdeen)
Sgt. R. C. Ruth, Royal Field Artillery (Bradford)
L. Cpl. A. J. Ryan, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Worthing)
2nd Cpl. J. F. Rycroft, Royal Engineers (Seacombe)
Spr. J. Rylance, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Sgt. G. H. Saddington, Royal West Kent Regiment (Canning Town)
Pte. W. C. Sage, East Kent Regiment (Thornbury)
Cpl. A. J. Sale, Bedfordshire Regiment (Shiffprd)
Dvr. A. Salmon, Royal Field Artillery (Walworth, London)
L. Cpl. W. Salmon, Royal Sussex Regiment (Bishops Stortford)
Gnr. W. Salt, Royal Field Artillery (Walthamstow)
Pte. T. Samson, Seaforth Highlanders (Kilmarnock)
Pte. J. G. Sandbrook, RAMC (Stockton-on-Tees)
Gnr. A. Sanders, Royal Field Artillery (Hinckley)
Cpl. C. H. Saunders, Border Regiment (Wimbledon)
Pte. E. G. Saunders, Grenadier Guards (Chorleywood)
Pte. A. Savage, Royal West Kent Regiment (Southall)
Cpl. R. Saville, Royal Field Artillery (Ipswich)
Pte. C. W. Scase, Suffolk Regiment (Great Ashfield)
Pte. T. W. Schofield, West Riding Regiment (Bradford)
L.C. A. C. Scott, Gordon Highlanders (Aberdeen)
Sgt. F. Scott, Gordon Highlanders (Aberdeen)
Pte. H. J. Scott, Army Service Corps (Purley)
Pte. R. Scott, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Mindrum, N.B.)
Pte. A. H. Scroggs, Grenadier Guards (West Hendon)
Spr. J. J. Scuffil, Royal Engineers (Dublin)
Pte. D. Scutt, RAMC (Portslade)
Pte. H. J. Seago, Norfolk Regiment (Great Yarmouth)
Pte. G. W. Seal, RAMC (Berkhamstead)
Air Mechanic, 1st Class E. Searson, Royal Flying Corps (Millom)
Sgt. F. Sears, Grenadier Guards (Pimlico, London)
Cpl. T. Searson, Royal Garrison Artillery (Leicester)
Pte. C. Sebry, RAMC (Waiworth)
Capt. T. Seddon, Royal Engineers (Pendlebury)
Sgt. W. G. Selfe, North Staffordshire Regiment (Burton-on-Trent)
Pte. L. Selwyn, Machine Gun Corps (Minsterworth)
Gnr. P. Senior, Royal Field Artillery (Batley)
Pte. J. Sergent, RAMC (Blackpool)
Act. L. Cpl. H. Settle, West Riding Regiment (Oldham)
Sgt. A. F. Seymour, Machine Gun Corps (Deptford)
Pte. W. E. Seymour, London Regiment (Catford, London)
Pte. G. Shakeshaft, RAMC (Wellington)
Sgt. H. Sharp, Royal Field Artillery (Bradford)
L. Cpl. J. Sharman, Military Foot Police (Sandhurst)
Gnr. T. S. Sharman, Royal Field Artillery (Woolverstone, near Ipswich)
Pte. A. Shaw, West Riding Regiment (Bradford)
Pte. G. Shaw, Machine Gun Corps (Droylsden)
Sgt. J. Shaw, Lancashire Fusiliers (Patricroft)
Pte. S. H. Shaw, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Bombr. J. Sheard, Royal Field Artillery (Leeds)
PK. W. E. Shearing, Royal Sussex Regiment (Granbourne)
Pte. G. Sheldon, South Staffordshire Regiment (West Bromwich)
Pte. L. Shellard, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (Banbury)
Pte. J. Shelley, Labour Corps (Fenton, Stoke-on-Trent)
Sgt. R. Shepherd, Royal Field Artillery (Beverley)
Pte. S. Shepherd, RAMC (Dunston-on-Tyne)
Pte. R. F. Sherfield, Grenadier Guards (Bentley, Hampshire.)
L. Cpl. A. E. Sherratt, West Riding Regiment (Huddersfield)
Gnr. H. Sherratt, Royal Field Artillery (Brown Edge)
Pte. Shields, Machine Gun Corps (Belfast)
Sgt. T. Shields, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Manchester)
Dvr. G. S. Ship, Royal Horse Artillery (Loddon)
Dvr. J. T. Shipman, Royal Field Artillery (Sparkbrook)
Pte. A. Shipp, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Haverhill)
Pte. F. J. Shirley, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Handsworth)
Gnr. P. Shovlin, Royal Garrison Artillery (Campsie)
Pte. T. Sidley, London Regiment (Islington)
Dvr. G. Simblett, Royal Engineers (E. Jarrow)
L. Cpl. R. A. Simcock, Royal Berkshire Regiment (Liverpool)
L. Cpl. E. Simcox, South Staffordshire Regiment (Oldbury)
Pte. W. Simcox, Shropshire Light Infantry (Newport)
Pte. J. B. Simmons, Royal Fusiliers (Kentish Town)
Pte. G. Simms, Northumberland Fusiliers (Grangetown)
Pte. H. J. Simons, Middlesex Regiment (St. Ives)
Pte. B. Simpson, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Sheffield)
Pte. D. Simpson, Gordon Highlanders (Cardendean, Fife)
Pte. H. Simpson, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. J. Simpson, Coldstream Guards (Accrington)
Pte. R. Simpson, Machine Gun Corps (Lochgelly)
Dvr. W. Sims, Royal Field Artillery (Bambledon)
Dvr. W. J. Skelton, Royal Field Artillery (Lambeth)
Cpl. W. H. Skinner, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (E. London, Royal Engineers)
Sgt. S. W. Skoyles, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Great Yarmouth)
Pte. W. E. Skyrme, Labour Corps (Clifton-on-Teme, Worcester)
Pte. J. G. Slack, York & Lancaster Regiment (Thornhill)
Pte. G. Slater, Coldstream Guards (Sunderlanct)
Pte. J. H. Slater, Border Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. W. Slater, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Wheatley)
Sgt. A. Sleath, Leicestershire Regiment (Rothley)
Pte. H. T. Sloan, Yorkshire Regiment (South Shields)
Pte. S. Sloan, RAMC (Hamilton)
Cpl. J. H. Sloman, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Kingsbridge)
Pte. J. Small, York & Lancaster Regiment (Sheffield)
Pte. R. T. Small, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
L. Sgt. R. D. Smartt, Royal West Kent Regiment (Walthamstow)
Cpl. J. J. Smelt, York & Lancaster Regiment (Rotherham)
Cpl. A. Smith, RAMC (Harwich)
Pte. A. Smith, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (St. Neots)
Pte. A. E. Smith, RAMC (Halifax)
Cpl. A. G. Smith, Machine Gun Corps (W. Croydon)
Sgt. C. E. Smith, Essex Regiment (Chatham)
Pte. E. Smith, East Surrey Regiment (Sutton)
Pte. F. Smith, West Yorkshire Regiment (York)
C.Q.M.S. F. T. Smith, West Yorkshire Regiment (W. Kensington)
Pte. G. Smith, East Surrey Regiment (TE. l Codford)
Sgt. H. Smith, London Regiment (Stepney)
Pte. H. Smith, West Yorkshire Regiment (York)
Pte. H. Smith, Norfolk Regiment (Clapham Park)
Pte. H. Smith, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Tamworth)
Dvr. H. S. Smith, Royal Horse Artillery (Stockton-on-Tees)
Pte. J. Smith, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Dundee)
Pte. J. Smith, South Staffordshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Sgt. J. Smith, Royal Field Artillery (Lye, Stourbridge)
L. Cpl. J. Smith, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Wolverhampton)
Pte. J. E. Smith, Lincolnshire Regiment (Spalding)
Pte. R. Smith, Royal Warwickshire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Company (Bedford)
Pte. S. Smith, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (Oxford)
Pte. T. Smith, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bristol)
Act. Sgt. T. C. Smith, Royal West Kent Regiment (Dockhead, London)
Cpl. W. Smith, Royal Engineers (Harrogate)
L. Cpl. W. Smith, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Connahs Quay, N. Wales)
Pte. W. Smith, Yorkshire Regiment (Earl Shilton)
Sgt. J. A. Smithson, Lancashire Fusiliers (Northfleet)
Cpl. F. Smoothy, Machine Gun Corps (Danbury)
Gnr. R. E. Snead, Royal Garrison Artillery (Preston-on-Tyne)
Spr. A. Snell, Royal Engineers (Torpoint)
Pte. S. T. Snelling, Machine Gun Corps (St. Mary)
Pte. J. Snowball, Durham Light Infantry (Lower, Wellington)
Pte. J. Snowden, West Riding Regiment (Bingley)
Sgt. J. Sockett, Lancashire Fusiliers (Skelmersdale)
Pur E. Sorensen, Royal Engineers (Cork)
Pte. G. Souter, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
Pte. C. Southgate, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Bury St. Edmunds)
Tpr. A. H. Spalding, Household Battalion (Derby)
Cpl. A. J. Sparkes, Middlesex Regiment (Taunton)
Air Mechanic, 1st Class C. B. Spicer, Royal Flying Corps (Dublin)
Pte. W. W. Spicer, Grenadier Guards (Wareham)
L. Cpl. A. Spinks, Machine Gun Corps (Islington)
Pte. N. Spooner, Northumberland Fusiliers (Ashwell Plough)
L. Cpl. W. T. Spraggs, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
L. Cpl. W. W. Spriggs, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Ashton-on-Mersey)
Pte. C. Spurr, York & Lancaster Regiment (Gawber)
Sgt. F. J. Squire, Royal Field Artillery (Boscastle)
Spr. W. J. Staines, Royal Engineers (Walworth)
Cpl. W. Stainsby, Royal Engineers (Nottingham)
Pte. A. G. Stallard, Dorsetshire Regiment (Kentish Town)
Pte. H. Stallard, RAMC (Port Sunlight)
Sgt. F. Stancliffe, Machine Gun Corps (Kirkheaton)
Pte. S. J. Staniford, RAMC (Berkhamstead)
Pte. J. H. Starbuck, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Bardon Hill)
Pte. S. Start, Machine Gun Corps (Southwark)
L. Cpl. A. E.V. Statham, Royal Engineers (Norwich)
L. Cpl. W. G. Steadman, Seaforth Highlanders (Crieff)
Gnr. H. C. Steele, Royal Field Artillery (Aston)
Cpl. R. J. Steele, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Sgt. J. Steeple, York & Lancaster Regiment (Rotherham)
Pte. A. Stenning, Grenadier Guards (E. Dorking)
Fitter J. W. Stephen, Royal Field Artillery (Aberdeen)
Sgt. R. W. Stephens, Shropshire Light Infantry (Hereford)
Pte. H. Stevenson, Grenadier Guards (Doncaster)
Gnr. G. Steward, Royal Garrison Artillery (Birmingham)
Pte. P. Stewart, Essex Regiment (E. Cape.Town)
Act. Sgt. J. F. Stiff, Suffolk Regiment (Bury St. Edmunds)
Gnr. L. T. Stillman, Royal Field Artillery (Chesham)
L. Cpl. S. Stirling, Gordon Highlanders (Motherwell)
Pte. T. H. Stirling, Seaforth Highlanders (Perth)
Sgt. G. Stock, Royal Garrison Artillery (Cambridge)
Cpl. C. S. Stockbridge, London Regiment (Regents Park)
Cpl. C. Stockdale, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. W. H. Stbckdale, Royal Field Artillery (Kirkdale)
Gnr. H. H. Stokes, Royal Field Artillery (West Bromwich)
Pte. W. Stokes, South Staffordshire Regiment (Darlaston)
Sgt. C. W. Stolfer, Machine Gun Corps (Lowestoft)
Dvr. F. G. Stone, Royal Field Artillery (South-sea)
2nd Cpl. J. Stones, Royal Engineers (Sheffield)
Sgt. H. Stoppard, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Chesterfield)
L. Cpl. S. Stopps, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Huthwaite)
Pte. W. Storey, Royal Sussex Regiment (Hoibeach)
Pte. J. G. Stormont, RAMC (Sunderland)
Pte. T. Street, Coldstream Guards (Ashton-under-Lyne)
Pte. W. Stringer, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Dewsbury)
Able Seaman A. Stuart, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Crosshill)
Sgt. T. Stuart, Manchester Regiment (Pemberton)
Pte. H. T. Stubbings, Royal Sussex Regiment (Bishops Stortford)
Spr. G. J. C. Stumbler, Royal Engineers (Birmingham)
Gnr. I. C. N. Sturgeon, Royal Garrison Artillery (Hepworth)
Pte. H. Styler, Worcestershire Regiment (Redditch)
Cpl. D. Styles, Machine Gun Corps (Cambridge)
Sgt. E. N. Sailings, London Regiment (Leytonstone)
L. Cpl. J. W. Sunderland, West Riding Regiment (Hebden Bridge)
Dvr. R. Sutherland, Royal Field Artillery (Everton)
Pte. T. Button, South Staffordshire Regiment (Tipton)
L. Cpl. R. Swain, Devonshire Regiment (Rochdale)
Pte. R. A. Swales, RAMC (York)
Pte. D. H. Swanston, Machine Gun Guards (Leith)
Sgt. W. T. G. Swarfield, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Croydon)
Cpl. E. Sweeney, Royal Garrison Artillery (Sligo)
Pte. J. Sweet, Yorkshire Regiment (Shipley)
Act. Sgt. S. J. Sweet, Military Foot Police (Devonport)
Spr. H. Swift, Royal Engineers (Bath)
Pte. J. Swift, Yorkshire Regiment (Huddersfield)
Pte. A. Swindles, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Salford)
Gnr. J. T. Swinhoe, Royal Field Artillery (Birkenhead)
Fitter Staff Sergeant J. Sym, Royal Garrison Artillery (Kilmarnock)
Pte. C. Tandy, Lancashire Fusiliers (Manchester)
Bombr. J. H. Tanner, Royal Field Artillery (Chelsea)
Cpl. H. Tannahill, Royal Irish Rifles (Dunmurry)
Spr. A. J. Tarbath, Royal Engineers (Hereford)
Bombr. J. Tate, Royal Field Artillery (Monkseaton)
L. Cpl. H. G. Tavener, Somerset Light Infantry (Bristol)
Sgt. A. V. Taylor, Royal Field Artillery (Hayes)
Sgt. C. H. Taylor, Essex Regiment (Witham)
Pte. F. Taylor, Machine Gun Corps (Hollingwood)
Pte. G. H. Taylor, Northumberland Fusiliers (Norton)
Pte. H. Taylor, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Coventry)
Pte. J. Taylor, Cameron Highlanders (Edinburgh)
Pte. J. Taylor, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Ferrybridge)
Pte. J. W. Taylor, West Riding Regiment (Leeds)
Cpl. M. V. Taylor, Machine Gun Guards (Whitby)
Sgt.l. R. Taylor, Royal Field Artillery (East dhinnock)
Gnr. S. Taylor, Royal Field Artillery (Earlsfield)
Pte. S. Taylor, Northumberland Fusiliers (Hulme)
Cpl. V. Taylor, West Riding Regiment (Brighouse)
L. Cpl. W. H. Taylor, Worcestershire Regiment (Brierley Hill)
Sgt. H. Taylorson, Royal Garrison Artillery (Sacristan)
Spr. W. Taziker, Royal Engineers (fmly. Seaforth Highlanders) (Atherstone)
Sgt. F. J. Tebbitt, Royal West Kent Regiment (Kelvedon)
Pte. J. Telfer, Border Regiment (Whitehaven)
Pte. J. T. Telford, Leicestershire Regiment (Loughborough)
Dvr. J. Terry, Royal Field Artillery (Hackney Wick)
Dvr. W. Terry, Royal Field Artillery (Charing)
Cpl. H. Tetlow, Machine Gun Corps (Stockport)
Pte. J. Thackeray, Yorkshire Regiment (Middlesbrough)
Act. Bombr. V. G. Thew, Royal Garrison Artillery (Harrogate)
Pte. L. Thistlethwaite, Yorkshire Regiment (Bradford)
Pte. R. A. Thorn, British West Indies Regiment (Jamaica)
Bombr. A. Thomas, Royal Field Artillery (Camberwell Green, London)
L. Cpl. D. Thomas, West Yorkshire Regiment (Chester-le-Street)
L. Cpl. G. Thomas, Royal Engineers (Highbury Park, London)
Pte. H. Thomas, Middlesex Regiment (Hoxton)
Cpl. H. G. Thomas, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Victoria Park, London)
Bombr. W. Thomas, Royal Field Artillery (Camberwell)
Cpl. A. G. Thompson, Grenadier Guards (Bristol)
2nd Cpl. A. W. Thompson, Royal Engineers (Norwich)
Dvr. H. Thompson, Royal Field Artillery (Colchester)
L. Cpl. J. Thompson, Royal Fusiliers (Birmingham)
Sgt. J. T. Thompson, Grenadier Guards (Ipswich)
Pte. W. Thompson, Lincolnshire Regiment (Leeds)
Sgt. W, Thompson, London Regiment (Glasgow)
L. Cpl. W. Thompson, Machine Gun Corps (Woodford Bridge)
Pte. S. Thompstone, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Manchester)
Pte. D. Thomson, RAMC (Dundee)
L. Cpl. G. Thomson, Machine Gun Corps (Halifax)
Sgt. L. I. Thomson, Royal Garrison Artillery (Newnham)
Pte. W. Thomson, Gordon Highlanders (Glasgow)
Pte. G. Thorley, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Newcastle, Staffs.)
Pte. T. Thornley, Cheshire Regiment (Bishopa Castle)
Gnr. W. Thornton, Royal Field Artillery (Bramley)
Pte. F. H. Threadgold, Military Mounted Police (Sarsham)
Cpl. G. Thurlbeck, Royal Field Artillery (Darlington)
Dvr. W. C. Thurston, Royal Engineers (Downham)
Cpl. J. Timson, Royal Field Artillery (Hull)
Pte. J. Tinlin, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Berwick)
Pte. S. Tinney, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Par)
Cpl. H. F. Tinsley, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
L. Sgt. R. Tippen, Gordon Highlanders (Newmilns)
Act. Bombr. G. A. Toft, Royal Garrison Artillery (Seaham Harbour)
Pte. P. Toman, Seaforth Highlanders (Stranraer)
Pnr. F. Tomey, Royal Engineers (Bloomsbury)
Pte. B. Tomlinson, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Clown)
Pte. J. Tomlinson, Grenadier Guards (E. Malpas)
L. Cpl. S. Tonkin, Honourable Artillery Company (Falmouth)
L. Cpl. E. P. Toole, West Yorkshire Regiment (West Hartlepool)
Dvr. G. H. Toon, Royal Field Artillery (Atherstone)
L. Cpl. HQ Towers, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Dalton-in-Furness)
Pte. H. G. Townshend, Norfolk Regiment (Hempnale)
Cpl. H. Towse, East Yorkshire Regiment (Hull)
Pte. A. Tran, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Dundee)
L. Cpl. W. Treadwell, Gloucestershire Regiment (Atherstone)
Sgt. E. S. Tresidder, Royal Field Artillery (South Woodford)
Sgt. W. H. A. Trew, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Finsbury Park, London)
Pte. J. F. Trigg, London Regiment (Islington)
Pnr. J. Trillian DCM Royal Engineers (Chiswick, London)
Gnr. H. Triplow, Royal Field Artillery (Stotfold)
Sgt. J. Troto, Royal Horse Artillery (Nr. Amersham)
Pte. R. Trotter, Scots Guards (Lochgelly)
Cpl. F. Trueman, Machine Gun Corps (Cloncarish)
Cpl. I. Tuckey, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Rushden)
L. Cpl. W. Tullie, Cameron Highlanders (Glasgow)
Pte. J. Turnbull, Cameron Highlanders (Gilmerton)
Gnr. W. Turnbull, Royal Field Artillery (Pallion)
L. Cpl. A. Turner, Royal Scots (Dolphinton, N.B.)
Pte. A. Turner, Royal West Kent Regiment (Fulham)
Pte. A. Turner, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Blackwell)
L. Cpl. E. B. Turner, Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Cpl. F. Turner, Machine Gun Corps (Rochdale)
Pte. F. C. Turner, Army Cyclist Corps (Sowerby Bridge)
Cpl. G. Turner, Hampshire Regiment (Birmingham)
L. Cpl. H. H. Turner, RAMC (Morley)
Pte. J. Turner, Gordon Highlanders (Brechin)
Pte. J. P. Turner, Northumberland Fusiliers (Long Eaton)
Dvr. L. Turpin, Royal Field Artillery (Cambridge)
Pte. W. Tween, East Surrey Regiment (Nr. Ongar)
Spr. F. Tyler, Royal Engineers (Liverpool)
Cpl. P. Tynan, Irish Guards (Gladdah)
Sgt. L. Type, Machine Gun Guards (Exmouth)
Pte. H. T. Tyrrell, Royal West Kent Regiment (Leiston)
Gnr. N. Underwood, Royal Garrison Artillery (Cobham)
Sgt. G. Upton, Cameron Highlanders (Staffs.)
Pte. D. G. Urquhart, Gordon Highlanders (Inverness)
Sgt. H. Uttley DCM Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Rotherham)
Gnr. C. Vallender, Royal Garrison Artillery (Lichfield)
Spr. W. Vartey, Royal Engineers (Normanton)
Pte. J. Varty, Coldstream Guards (Dunston)
Act. Cpl. G. Vaughan, Royal West Kent Regiment (E. Maidstone)
Sgt. G. E. Vdcary, Royal Sussex Regiment (Lewes)
Gnr. C. A. Vieweg, Royal Garrison Artillery (Billericay)
Gnr. J. H. Vincent, Royal Field Artillery (Jarrow)
Pte. C. Viney, RAMC (Stanford)
Pte. G. Vooe, Grenadier Guards (Stamford Hill, London)
Sgt. R. W. Voller, Royal Garrison Artillery (Hastings)
Pte. W. Voyce, Grenadier Guards (Gloucester)
Bombr. A. Wagg, Royal Field Artillery (Loughton)
Pte. E. Waghorn, Royal West Kent Regiment (Woolwich)
Dvr. H. Wainwright, Royal Field Artillery (Sheffield)
L. Cpl. W. Wainwright, Grenadier Guards (Mickleover)
Sgt. L. J. Waldram, Durham Light Infantry (Nottingham)
Pte. A. Wale, Coldstream Guards (Coventry)
Pte. C. Walgate, Leicestershire Regiment (Nottingham)
L. Cpl. . F. Walker, York & Lancaster Regiment (Kilnhurst)
Pte. J. Walker, Yorkshire Regiment (Bradford)
Sgt. J. W. Walker, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Castleford)
Act. Sgt. C. Wallis, Lincolnshire Regiment (Bethnal Green, London)
Pte. A. Wallond, Royal West Kent Regiment (West, Farleigh)
Bte. C. Walsh, West Riding Regiment (Hebdem Bridge)
Pte. A. Walters, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
Sgt. W. W. G. Walters, Machine Gun Corps (Yarmouth)
Sgt. B. Walton, Grenadier Guards (Grantham)
Cpl. G. A. Walton, Yorkshire Regiment (London
Pte. A. A. Ward, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
L. Cpl. F. Ward, Military Foot Police (Selby)
Pte. G. Ward, Shropshire Light Infantry (Oakengates)
Pte. H. Ward, Suffolk Regiment (Dronfield)
Cpl. J. F. Ward, RF.A. (Battersea)
Pte. R. Ward, RAMC (Dereham)
Cpl. W. Ward, Royal Garrison Artillery (Northampton)
Dvr. J. Ware, Royal Field Artillery (Abercynon, Glamorgan)
L. Cpl. T. L. Ware, Devonshire Regiment (Ottery St. Mary)
Tpr. A. E. Warner, Household Battalion (Englefield Green)
Pte. A. Warren, Leicestershire Regiment (Croft)
L. Cpl. H. C. Warren, Royal Engineers (Parkstone)
Sgt. J. E. Warren, York & Lancaster Regiment (Woodhouse)
Pte. S. Warrington, Northumberland Fusiliers (Altrincham)
Pte. F. Waterfield, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Redhill)
Pte. H. Waterhouse, Northumberland Fusiliers (Burley)
Act. Cpl. F. Waters, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Sgt. F. G. Waters, Rifle Brigade (Aldershot)
L. Cpl. G. C. F. Waters, Royal Sussex Regiment (Wadhurst)
Sgt. A. Waterworth, Machine Gun Corps (Oldham)
Pte. T. Watkins, Northumberland Fusiliers (Swalxwell)
Sgt. A. Watmough, Royal Field Artillery (Leeds)
Pte. F. Watson, Labour Corps (Long-Bennington)
Pte. H. Watson, Norfolk Regiment (King's Lynn)
Cpl. J. E. Watson, Royal Sussex Regiment (Hastings)
Pte. M. Watson, Border Regiment (Arlecdon)
Cpl. W. Watson, East Yorkshire Regiment (Hull)
Cpl. A. S. Watts, Grenadier Guards (West Torwood, London)
L. Cpl. J. Wayburn, Devonshire Regiment (Lynton)
Pte. L. B. Weatherhead, Machine Gun Guards (Dundee)
Pte. C. Webb, Suffolk Regiment (Sproughton)
L. Cpl. E. Webb, West Yorkshire Regiment (Ashwell)
Pte. W. Webb, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Handsworth)
Sgt. A. Webster, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Burnley)
Pte. C. D. Webster, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Gnr. F. C. Webster, Royal Garrison Artillery (Dartford)
Dvr. J. Webster, Royal Field Artillery (Liverpool)
Pte. A. E. Wells, South Staffordshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Cpl. E. H. Wells, Royal West Kent Regiment (Henley-on-Thames)
Pte. W. Wells, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (Banbury)
Pte. F. Welton, Northumberland Fusiliers (Bury St. Edmunds)
Gnr. J. Welsh, Headquarters, Royal Field Artillery (Kensington)
Pte. J. Welsh, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Coldstream)
Pte. P. Welsh, West Yorkshire Regiment (York)
Dvr. E. Wendrop, Royal Field Artillery (Limehouse)
Sgt. H. W. Wentworth, Grenadier Guards (Thame)
Pte. A. E. Weston, Worcestershire Regiment (Worcester)
L. Cpl. A. Westwood, Royal Engineers (Rotherham)
Cpl. J. Westwood, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Oldhill)
Pte. J. Wetherton, Coldstream Guards (Pontypridd)
Pte. M. Whale, Machine Gun Corps (Taunton)
Pnr. T. Whalley, Royal Engineers (Chorley)
Sgt. H. G. Whant, Royal Field Artillery (Hungerford)
L. Cpl. J. Wharton, Durham Light Infantry (Fencehouses)
Sgt. J. Wheeler, Royal Field Artillery (Bicester)
L. Cpl. G. Whiles, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Newark-on-Trent)
Pte. E. Whitbread, Machine Gun Corps (Sandy)
Pte. F. Whitby, Suffolk Regiment (March)
Dvr. A. White, Royal Field Artillery (Exmouth)
Gnr. A. J. White, Royal Garrison Artillery (E. Hull)
L. Cpl. B. White, South Staffordshire Regiment (Wolverhampton)
Pte. G. E. White, Royal Scots Fusiliers (Derby)
Pte. R. White, Leicestershire Regiment (Leicester)
Act. Bombr. S. White, Royal Garrison Artillery (E. Devonport)
Pte. W. White, York & Lancaster Regiment (Sheffield)
Sgt. F. Whitehead, Royal Engineers (Stretford)
Sgt. T. Whitehead, Royal Garrison Artillery (Finslmry Park, London)
Sgt. A. G. Whiteman, Royal Sussex Regiment (Sandy)
L. Cpl. C. Whitmore, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Birmingham)
Pte. H. Whithell, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bristol)
Cpl. G. Whittaker, Leicestershire Regiment (Shirebrook)
Pte. C. Wnytje, Royal Highlanders (Guardbridge)
Spr. W. G. Wiggins, Royal Engineers (Ladywell, London)
Sgt. C. A. Wilcox, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bristol)
Cpl. C. Wilde, T. R. Battalion, attd. Machine Gun Corps (Heaton Norris)
Pte. H. Wilde, London Regiment (Lefe, London)
Sgt. J. Wilde, Machine Gun Guards (Cardiff)
Spr. W. J. Wildgoose, Royal Engineers (Sheffield)
Pte. G. H. Wilding, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Monmouth)
Sgt. A. H. Wileman, Royal Sussex Regiment (Luton, Bedfordshire)
Sgt. E. Wilkinson, Royal Field Artillery (Openshaw)
Sgt. E. Wilkinson, RAMC (New Wortley)
Pte. J. Wilkinson, Coldstream Guards (Ulverston)
Pte. T. H. Wilkinson, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Ulverston)
Dvr. J. Will, Army Service Corps (E. Dundee)
Cpl. C. Willatt, Coldstream Guards (Exmbuth)
Pte. P. R. Willcocks, East Kent Regiment (Manchester)
Sgt. A. J. Williams, Royal Field Artillery (Colchester)
L. Cpl. F. Williams, Gloucestershire Regiment (Newent)
Pte. G. Williams, Machine Gun Corps (Golcar)
Pte. J. Williams, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Truro)
Pte. J. F. Williams, RAMC (Newton Abbot)
Sgt. J. N. Williams, Devonshire Regiment (Rochdale)
Pte. T. Williams, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Cannock)
Chief Petty Officer W. G. Williams RN (Gosport)
Pte. G. W. Williamson, Coldstream Guards, attd. Machine Gun Guards (Feltham)
Pte. A. Willis, Northumberland Fusiliers (Manningham)
Cpl. B. Wilson, West Riding Regiment (Halifax)
Gnr. E. Wilson, Royal Field Artillery (Patricroft)
L. Cpl. H. Wilson, Durham Light Infantry (Sunderland)
Pte. J. R. Wilson, York & Lancaster Regiment (Beverley)
L. Cpl. W. Wiltshire, Hampshire Regiment (Portsmouth)
Cpl. W. H. Wiltshire, Coldstream Guards (Plaistow, London)
Pte. H. Wimblett, West Riding Regiment (Keighley)
Pte. A. Wing, York & Lancaster Regiment (West Melton)
L. Cpl. S. Wingfield, Northumberland Fusiliers (Pirixori)
Spr. J. Winkle, Royal Engineers (Willenhall)
Pte. J. Winn, Hampshire Regiment (Taunton)
Pte. J. Winter, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Castleford)
Pte. S. Winter, Leicestershire Regiment (Atherstone)
Sgt. W. H. V. Winter, East Yorkshire Regiment (Market Weighton)
Spr. H. Winton, Royal Engineers (Brighton)
Pte. W. Wisdom, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Guildford)
Spr. E. Witcutt, Royal Engineers (Walsall)
Cpl. T. Withers, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Leicester)
Gnr. W. G. Wollcbtt, Royal Field Artillery (Bridgwater)
L. Cpl. A. Wolstenholme, Machine Gun Corpy (Blackburn)
Pte. T. H. Womack, Suffolk Regiment (Kelsall)
Cpl. A. Wood, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Lancaster)
Pte. A. Wood, Dorsetshire Regiment (Suhderland)
Sgt. C. R. Wood, Army Service Corps (Islington)
Dvr. F. W. Wood, Royal Field Artillery (Hanley)
Sgt. F. W. Wood, York & Lancaster Regiment (Conisboro)
Cpl. H. Wood, Coldstream Guards (Befmondsey, London)
Pte. H. Wobd, Worcestershire Regiment (Evesham)
Sgt. H. Wood, Lancashire Fusiliers (Barnsley)
Pte. J. Wood, East Surrey Regiment (Limehouse)
Bombr. W. Wood, Royal Field Artillery (Uppermill, near Oldhana)
Pte. W. A. Wood, Cheshire Regiment (Stockport)
Pte. C. V. Woodall, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Cottingham)
L. Cpl. A. Woodham, Military Foot Police (Salisbury)
L. Cpl. C. W. Woods, Machine Gun Corps (Old. Woking)
Sgt. J. Woodward, Machine Gun Corps (Dundee)
Sgt. J. H. Woodward, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Sgt. F. Woolfson, Royal Field Artillery (Stone)
L. Cpl. H. Woolham, West Yorkshire Regiment (Bradford)
Sgt. H. Wootton, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Pontefract)
Sgt. F. J. Wormald, Army Service Corps (Bedford)
Pte. W. S. Worthington, Lancashire Fusiliers (Eccles)
L. Cpl. J. Wotton, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Bow, London)
Spr. H. Woulds, Royal Engineers (Keckwich Moor, Cheshire)
Act. Cpl. S. R. Wraight, Royal Field Artillery (Bow)
Sgt. H. E. Wratten, Royal Engineers (Greenwich)
Bombr. F. A. Wray, Royal Field Artillery (Kennington, London)
Pte. A. Wright, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bristol)
Sgt. A. I. Wright, Suffolk Regiment (Cherrihinton)
Pte. E. Wright, Bedfordshire Regiment (Isleworth)
Spr. F. Wright, Royal Engineers (Nottingham)
L. Cpl. J. Wright, Royal Engineers (Warrington)
Dvr. J. Wright, Royal Field Artillery (Greenwich)
Pte. J. Wright, Northumberland Fusiliers (Earby, near Keighley)
Sgt. R. Wright, Seaforth Highlanders (Westminster, London)
Sgt. D. G. Wyatt, Rifle Brigade (Ipswich)
L. Cpl. T. Wylie, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Paisley)
L. Cpl. W. J. Teaman, Royal Irish Rifles (Carrowdore)
Pte. J. Youdell, Border Regiment (West Hartlepool)
Spr. A. D. Young, Royal Engineers (Kirrimuir)
L. Cpl. G. J. Young, Machine Gun Corps (Shepherd's Bush)
Pte. H. D. Young, Army Service Corps (York)
Cpl. J. Young, Royal Field Artillery (Hendy)
2nd Cpl. N. A. Young, Royal Engineers (Aberdeen)
Pte. H. Youngman, Suffolk Regiment (Marlesford)
Cpl. W. Abbotts, Royal Field Artillery (Norwich)
Pte. E. F. Abrahams, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Limehonse, London)
Pte. F. Adams, Hampshire Regiment (Haggerston)
Pte. T. Adlam, London Regiment (Peckham, London)
Pte. T1 Adshead, Cheshire Regiment (E. Chester)
Dvr. G. Ainsworth, Royal Field Artillery (Gorton)
Pte. W. Alderson, Machine Gun Corps (Bishops Castle)
Pte. T. C. Allan, Durham Light Infantry (E. Durham)
Pte. A. Allen, Gloucestershire Regiment (Watchet)
L. Cpl. W. Allsworth, London Regiment (Chiswick)
L. Cpl. J. B. Ames, Cheshire Regiment (Cheltenham)
L. Cpl. C. Amor, Royal Engineers (Mynach)
Spr. W. Amos, Royal Engineers (Warrington)
Gnr. E. Amy, Royal Field Artillery (St. Saviours, Jersey)
Pte. J. Anderson, RAMC (Hirst Ashington)
Dvr. W. F. Andrews, Royal Field Artillery (Shero borne)
Gnr. T. Armitage, Royal Garrison Artillery (York)
Pte. H. Armstrong, London Regiment (Dungiven)
Gnr. J. Armstrong, Royal Field Artillery (Ryhope)
Pte. W. Armstrong, RAMC (Northwich)
L. Cpl. G. Arnold, London Regiment (Braintree)
Gnr. C. Ashby, Royal Field Artillery (Hull)
Dvr. E. W. Ashton, Royal Field Artillery (Caerphilly)
Pte. J. Ashworth, Manchester Regiment (Bury)
Spr. A. Atkins, Royal Engineers (Leicester)
Pte. W. J. Auldjo, Northumberland Fusiliers (Felton)
Pte. F. W. Ayling, London Regiment (Hove)
L. Cpl. R. W. Aylward, Yeomanry (N. Kensington)
L. Cpl. H. J. Back, Royal Sussex Regiment (Faversham)
Pte. W. A. Bacon, London Regiment (Southwark Park Rd.)
Pte. J. Baigent, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Woking)
Pte. W. J. Bailey, RAMC (Easton)
Pte. F. Bainbridge, South Staffordshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Gnr. J. Baines, Royal Field Artillery (Bolton)
Pte. J. Baird, Cameron Highlanders (Stirling)
Gnr. H. Bakes, Royal Field Artillery (Hodthorpe)
Pte. E. Baldwin, East Lancashire Regiment (Burnley)
Pte. J. T. Ball, London Regiment (Reading)
Sgt. J. H. A. Bannister, Labour Corpa (Plaistow)
Sgt. G. E. Banting, London Regiment (Forest Gate)
Pte. J. J. Barber, South Staffordshire Regiment (Smallthorne)
Pte. A. E. Barker, Royal Marine Light Infantry (Sheffield)
Pte. W. Barker, Manchester Regiment (Longsight)
Cpl. J. A. Barlow, Machine Gun Corps (Bethnal Green, London)
Able Seaman T. Barrett, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Dvr. W. F. Barrett, Royal Field Artillery (Rotherhithe)
Sgt. B. O. Barton, Yeomanry (Slymbridge)
Pte. G. E. Barton, Royal West Kent Regiment (E. Chatham)
Pte. E. Bastow, London Regiment (Bradford)
Gnr. W. Baurn, Royal Garrison Artillery (Middleton-in-Teesdale)
Pte. S. J. Bayliss, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Cpl. C. R. Bee, London Regiment (Nottingham)
Sgt. H. Beetham, Lancashire Fusiliers (Collingworth)
Pte. I. Bell, Northumberland Fusiliers (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Sgt. L. Bell, Northumberland Fusiliers (Haydon Bridge)
Cpl. G. Bennett, Royal Garrison Artillery (Olapham)
Spr. J. Bennett, Royal Engineers (Colyton)
Gnr. S. W. Bennett, Royal Garrison Artillery (Oldbury)
Sgt. G. H. Benning, Royal Field Artillery (Maidenhead)
Pte. J. Bentley, London Regiment (Kennington)
Sgt. S. C. Beet, London Regiment (Newington Butts)
Gnr. W. Best, Royal Garrison Artillery (Gravesend)
L. Cpl. C. F. Bicknell, RAMC (Tolworth, Surrey)
Pte. G. Biddlecombe, Devonshire Regiment (Lyndhurst)
Sgt. C. Bignell, Royal Field Artillery (London)
L. Cpl. H. Bill, Leinster Regiment (Chapelizod)
Sgt. S. A. Billett, Royal Field Artillery (Little Salsbury)
Pte. H. J. Billingham, London Regiment (Dalston)
Gnr. J. Birchall, Royal Field Artillery (Widnes)
Gnr. W. Black, Royal Field Artillery (Belfast)
Bombr. J. W. Blackby, Royal Field Artillery (Plumstead, London)
Pte. L. Blake, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bemerton)
Pte. E. Blankley, Durham Light Infantry (Loughborough)
Pte. J. E. Board, London Regiment (Battersea Park)
Pte. A. Bollen, London Regiment (Notting Hill)
L. Cpl. W. M. Bolt, Devonshire Regiment (Chudleigh)
Pte. H. E. Bond, Army Service Corps (Kingston-on-Thames)
Pte. R. W. Booth, Royal Marine Light Infantry (Heanor)
L. Cpl. R. Bosworth, Lancashire Fusiliers (Worcester)
Able Seaman A. Bower, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Sheffield)
Cpl. W. C. Bowler, Royal Army Veterinary Corps (Kempston)
Act. Sgt. W. H. Boyd, Military Mounted Police (Bridgton)
Gnr. J. Bradford, Headquarters, Royal Field Artillery (Bermondsey)
Dvr. J. Bradley, Royal Field Artillery (Kidderminster)
Sgt. J. J. Bradley, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers (Glasgow)
Sgt. E. A. Bramley, Royal Engineers (Newcastle)
Pte. T. Bray, London Regiment (Tottenham)
Pte. W. J. Brickwood, RAMC (Horsham)
Pte. L. G. Briers, Lancashire Fusiliers (Kentish Town)
Sgt. H. G. Britten, Hampshire Regiment (Salisbury)
Sgt. C. Broad, Yorkshire Regiment (Middlesbrough)
Pte. B. G. Brown, RAMC (Lower Edmonton)
Dvr. E. Brown, Royal Field Artillery (Derby)
Pte. H. Brown, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Farnborough)
Spr. P. Brown, Royal Engineers (Polmont)
Dvr. R. M. Brown, Royal Field Artillery (Carlisle)
Act. Bombr. G. Buckingham, Royal Garrison Artillery (Cowley)
Bombr. F. Buckley, Royal Field Artillery (Manchester)
Pte. W. Buckley, Border Regiment (Maryport)
Pte. F. Budgett, Gloucestershire Regiment (Frome)
Bombr. G. Burdess, Royal Field Artillery (Dandon Colliery)
Pte. J. T. Burford, Northumberland Fusiliers (Willington Quay)
Pte. F. Burnett, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Broadwood Widger)
L. Cpl. T. Burnett, East Lancashire Regiment (Colne)
Sgt. J. Burney, Machine Gun Corps (Harras Moor)
Pnr. C. E. Burrage, Royal Engineers (Great Yarmouth)
Sgt. W. Burrows, Royal Field Artillery (Forest Gate)
Pte. J. Bury, East Lancashire Regiment (Darwen)
Pte. H. H. Butcher, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Dartford)
Pte. J. Butcher, London Regiment (Walthamstow)
Pte. R. Butcher, RAMC (Crawley)
Pte. B. Cadden, Cheshire Regiment (Wallasey)
Act. L. Cpl. W. Cambray, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Newport, Mon.)
Pte. J. Campbell, Machine Gun Corps (Wylam-on-Tyne)
Dvr. B. H. Cantle, Royal Field Artillery (Lambeth)
Dvr. A. Carmichael, Royal Field Artillery (Glenborg, N.B.)
Pte. P. Carpenter, London Regiment (Westminster)
Cpl. C. Carr, Northumberland Fusiliers (Whittingham)
Pte. J. Carroll, RAMC (Old Cummock)
Pte. J. Carter, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (E. Dublin)
Cpl. J. G. Cavey, Cheshire Regiment (Lewes)
Pte. A. Chadwick, Machine Gun Corps (Liddall)
L. Cpl. A. Chalmers, Gordon Highlanders (Wiehaw)
Act. Cpl. W. G. Chandler, Royal Field Artillery (Farncombe)
Pte. H. A. Chapman, London Regiment (Streatham)
L. Cpl. G. Charpey, Devonshire Regiment (Pimlico)
Sgt. E. Christopher, Machine Gun Corps (Whitehaven)
Spr. W. G. R. Clark, Royal Engineers (Paddington)
Pte. A. Clarke, Rifle Brigade (Aldershot)
Pte. A. J. Clarke, Royal Fusiliers (E. Acton)
Pte. B. Clarke, North Staffordshire Regiment (Lichfield)
Pte. C. V. Clarke, London Regiment (London)
Sgt. H. S. Cliff, RAMC (Torquay)
Pte. L. Coates, British West Indies Regiment (Jamaica)
Able Seaman B. Cobb, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Castleford)
Able Seaman J. Cobbledick, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Ashington)
Pte. C. Cocker, Northumberland Fusiliers (Humshaugh)
Gnr. H. S. Cockshott, Royal Garrison Artillery (Glessburn)
Pte. E. Cohen, London Regiment (Hoxton)
Gnr. A. E. Coleman, Royal Field Artillery (E. Swindon)
Pte. F. Coleman, London Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. H. Coles, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. W. Collier, RAMC (Bolton)
Pte. G. Collingwood, London Regiment (Highgate Rd.)
Pte. R. C. Comley, South Staffordshire Regiment (Warmley)
Pte. J. Connolly, East Lancashire Regiment (Newchurch-in-Rossendale)
Spr. A. Connon, Royal Engineers (Aberdeen)
Cpl. F. J. Cook, Royal Garrison Artillery (Hurst Batch)
L. Cpl. J. Cook, South Staffordshire Regiment (Cranbrook)
Gnr. S. Cooper, Royal Garrison Artillery (Nottingham)
Sgt. E. Corkish, Royal Garrison Artillery (E. Castletown)
Gnr. B. Coss, Royal Field Artillery (Stockport)
Spr. W. Coutts, Royal Engineers (Comrie)
Pte. H. Cowstdck, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Thornton. Heath)
Spr. J. Cox, Royal Engineers (Bradley)
Pte. T. Crank, Machine Gun Corps (Leigh)
Pte. E. Crawshaw, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Blackburn)
Sgt. J. E. Cree, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Chesterfield)
2nd Cpl. F. W. Greedy, Royal Engineers (Bridgwater)
L. Sgt. W. J. Crews, Machine Gun Corps (Okehampton)
Bombr. W. Cribbin, Royal Field Artillery (Dublin)
Pte. H. T. Croad, London Regiment (Westminster)
Pte. A. S. Cross, Machine Gun Corps (Hull)
Pte. L. Crowther, Manchester Regiment (Newton Heath)
L. Cpl. S. Cutler, London Regiment (Southwark)
Cpl. J. Curran, Lancashire Fusiliers (Balford)
Tmp Bombardier, W. Curtis, Royal Marine Artillery (Chiswick)
Act. Bombr. A. C. Daft, Royal Field Artillery (Cheltenham)
Pte. S. T. Darch, Gloucestershire Regiment (Chessels)
L. Cpl. E. Davies, Royal Engineers (Pontardulais)
L. Cpl. H. C. Davies, Machine Gun Corps (Croydon)
Pte. J. Davies, Labour Corps (Blackburn)
Cpl. R. Davies, RAMC (Putson)
Air Mechanic, 2nd Class F. F. Dawson, Royal Flying Corps (Metheringham)
Act. L. Cpl. J. Dawson, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Pte. C. G. Day, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Thorp)
L. Cpl. J. A. Day, London Regiment (Wandsworth)
Able Seaman F. A. O. de Boltz, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Great Yarmouth)
Sgt. J. A. Dearnley, Royal Field Artillery (Thurstonland)
Sgt. W. G. Dedman, Royal Field Artillery (Abbeywood)
Gnr. E. Dempsey, Royal Field Artillery (Flixton)
Pte. C. Desmond, Devonshire Regiment (Cork)
Pte. F. H. Dobson, Royal Marine Light Infantry (Wragly)
Gnr. J. Dodd, Royal Garrison Artillery (Tunstall)
Pte. F. J. Downing, Army Service Corps (Chaddesden)
Spr. E. G. Drew, Royal Engineers (Horningloft)
Pte. H. J. Drew, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bristol)
Sgt. R. Driver, East Lancashire Regiment (Clitheroe)
Sgt. G. Duckworth, Machine Gun Corps (St. Helens)
Pte. J. Duffy, Manchester Regiment (Bury)
Act. Bombr. T. Duffy, Royal Field Artillery (Sunderland)
Pte. J. Duncan, Gordon Highlanders (Liverpool)
Pte. M. B. Durham, Northumberland Fusiliers (Knottingley)
Able Seaman J. Durie, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Fetter Cairn)
Pte. J. T. Dyer, Manchester Regiment (Holinwood)
L. Cpl. C. Dyker, Gordon Highlanders (Enzie)
L. Cpl. A. Edgar, Gordon Highlanders (Eastfield by Annan)
Bombr. J. Edwards, Royal Field Artillery (Hednesford)
L. Cpl. C. F. Elliott, Northumberland Fusiliers (Acklington)
Pte. V. F. Ellis, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Sherley)
Spr. W. Elsdon, Royal Engineers (Northampton)
Act. Sgt. D. Elwell, South Staffordshire Regiment (Walsall)
Pte. F. G. Elwyn, Northumberland Fusiliers (Norwich)
Cpl. J. T. Emmerson, Royal Engineers (Grimsby)
Pte. R. Emmett, London Regiment (Bermondsey)
Dvr. R. Emms, Royal Field Artillery (Eberington)
Pte. D. E. Evans, South Staffordshire Regiment (Treharris)
Able Seaman S. Evans, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Swansea)
Pte. A. H. Eve, Labour Corps (Chiswick)
Pte. J. W. Everard, London Regiment (Fulham)
Pte. H. Farrell, London Regiment (Bermondsey)
Pte. G. Farrimond, RAMC (St. Helens)
Pte. F. Farrington, Border Regiment (Tyldesley)
Cpl. A. Fell, Machine Gun Corps (Worcester Park)
Pte. W. Fellows, South Staffordshire Regiment (Wolverhampton)
Dvr. H. Fenton, Royal Field Artillery (Oldham)
L. Cpl. J. Ferns, Gordon Highlanders (Campsie)
Gnr. P. Ferris, Royal Field Artillery (Glasgow)
Spr. G. Fetherston, Royal Engineers (Sprotborough)
Pte. P. T. Finlay, Yeomanry (Southfields, London)
Sgt.i. J. H. Fisher, London Regiment (Finsbury Park)
Pte. J. H. Fisher, West Yorkshire Regiment (Rotheiham)
Bombr. G. Fitch, Royal Field Artillery (Ilford, London)
L. Cpl. W. H. Fitton, Lancashire Fusiliers (Oldham)
Sgt. H. Fitzgerald, North Staffordshire Regiment (Burton-on-Trent)
Pte. J. W. Flavell, South Staffordshire Regiment (Bilston)
Able Seaman A. Flett, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Aberdeen)
Gnr. J. Flynn, Royal Garrison Artillery (E. Cork)
Gnr. E. Ford, Royal Field Artillery (Mildenhall)
Pte. A. Foster, Northumberland Fusiliers (Babblesworth)
L. Sgt G. C. Foster, South Staffordshire Regiment (Wednesbury)
Pte. A. Foulis, West Yorkshire Regiment (Leeds)
Spr. F. Fowler, Royal Engineers (Hull)
Pte. J. Francis, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Church-Stoke)
Sgt. J. T. French, Royal Engineers (Redruth)
Pnr. W. Fryer, Royal Engineers (Stafford)
L. Cpl. A. Fuller, Royal Sussex Regiment (Brede)
Cpl. C. Gallacher, Army Service Corps (Broughty Ferry)
Pte. P. Gallagher, Yorkshire Regiment (Swinford)
Pte. J. Gemmell, Seaforth Highlanders (Alloa)
Cpl. E. Gentle, Royal Garrison Artillery (Wood Green)
Pte. G. J. Gentry, RAMC (Tooting, London)
Cpl. T. Geraghty, RAMC (Dublin)
Act. Sgt. C. H. Gibbins, London Regiment (Brixton)
Dvr. V. G. Gibbins, Royal Field Artillery (Rugby)
Dvr. R. Gibbon, Royal Field Artillery (Durham)
Dvr. H. S. Gibbons, Royal Field Artillery (Mile End, London)
Petty Officer G. Gilfillan, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Port Glasgow)
Pte. R. Gilson, London Regiment (Bermondsey)
Sgt. G. A. Goode, Royal Engineers (Birmingham)
Sgt. A. W. Goodman, London Regiment (Kennington)
Bombr. F. Goodwin, Royal Field Artillery (Denton)
Pte. G. Gordon, Gordon Highlanders, attd. Machine Gun Corps (Dufftown)
C.Q.M.S. A. Graham, Army Service Corps (Hampstead)
Sgt. R. Graham, East Lancashire Regiment (Blackburn)
Bombr. J. R. Gray, Royal Field Artillery (Seaham Harbour)
Pte. H. Green, Machine Gun Corps (London)
L. Sgt. M. E. Green, London Regiment (Dulwich)
Pte. N. W. Green, RAMC (Littletown, York)
Pnr. W. T. Graenhill, Royal Engineers (Holloway)
Pte. F. Greenwood, Border Regiment (Rochdale)
Dvr. H. Greenwood, Royal Field Artillery (Bolton)
Cpl. J. Greenwood, Army Service Corps (Sheffield)
Cpl. S. Greenwood, Manchester Regiment (E. Stalybridge)
Sgt. G. Gregson, East Lancashire Regiment (Brierfield)
Pte. H. B. Griffiths, RAMC (Shrewsbury)
Sgt. T. Griffiths, Machine Gun Corps (Welshpool)
L. Cpl. R. F. Grimsey, London Regiment (Kennington)
Able Seaman J. Grosart, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Glasgow)
Pte. A. Guest, Lancashire Fusiliers (Manchester)
Pte. T. Guest, Royal Scots Fusiliers (Manchester)
Spr. T. J. Gunter, Royal Engineers (Clapton)
Pte. F. Hall, Northumberland Fusiliers (Bradford)
Pte. W. J. Hall, London Regiment (Upton Park)
Cpl. W. W. C. Hall, RAMC (Liverpool)
Bombr. S. Halliday, Royal Field Artillery (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Pte. J.Hardy, Northumberland Fusiliers (Eltringham)
Pte. F. Harper, Manchester Regiment (Salford)
Pte. T. Harrington, Manchester Regiment (Bradford)
Cpl. G. C. Harris, Royal Sussex Regiment (Chichester)
Sgt. P. Harris, Devonshire Regiment (Axminster)
Pte. S. J. Harris, Yeomanry (Avening)
L. Sgt. W. Harris, Lincolnshire Regiment (Lincoln)
Cpl. W. E. Harris, London Regiment (Queens Park)
Pte. W. H. Harris, London Regiment (Athens, U.S.A.)
Act. Sgt. W. H. Harris, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Aston)
L. Sgt. J. Harrison, Cheshire Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. S. E. Harrison, Border Regiment (Warrington)
Dvr. E. Hartley, Royal Field Artillery (Macclesfield)
Pte. F. G. Harvey, Worcestershire Regiment (Worcester)
Pte. H. Harwood, Northumberland Fusiliers (Shepherd's Bush)
L. Cpl. H. Hawkett, Royal Sussex Regiment (Westbourne Park)
Cpl. B. Hawkins, Royal Field Artillery (Islington, London)
Pte. T. W. Hawkins, Army Service Corps (Corbridge-on-Tyne)
Pte. J. Haynes, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Pte. J. W. Haynes, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (St. Neots)
Sgt. H. E. Hayward, Royal Field Artillery (Fulham)
Sgt. F. Heath, Manchester Regiment (Greenheys)
Pte. G. Heath, North Staffordshire Regiment (Burton-on-Trent)
Sgt. J. H. Heath, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (St. Germans)
Pte. H. Hedger, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Shackleford)
Bombr. N. Hemingway, Royal Garrison Artillery (Halifax)
Spr. G. A. Henderson, Royal Engineers (Stanhope)
Q.M.S. R. G. Herbert, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Guildford)
Pte. J. Higgins, East Lancashire Regiment (Chadderton)
Cpl. W. M. Hislop, London Regiment (Wallington)
L. Cpl. W. A. Hitchcock, Devonshire Regiment (Tamerton Foliot)
Cpl. F. W. H. Hoare, Welsh Regiment (Boror, London)
Pte. D. Hobin, South Staffordshire Regiment (Wolverhampton)
Pte. C. Hockley, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Hambledon)
Able Seaman J. H. D. Hogg, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (South Byker)
Pte. A. Holland, Leinster Regiment (Ludlow)
Pte. J. S. Hollidge, Norfolk Regiment (St. Leomardson-Sea)
Gnr. J. Hollobone, Royal Garrison Artillery (Eastbourne)
Pte. A. H. J. Hooper, London Regiment (Poplar)
L. Cpl. A. E. Hopton, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bristol)
Pte. T. Horrocks, RAMC (Liverpool)
Gnr. W. Horsfield, Royal Field Artillery (Bradford)
L. Cpl. F. H. Houghton, Dorsetshire Regiment (Arlisey)
Cpl. W. Houlder, Royal Field Artillery (Churwel)
Sgt. T. How, London Regiment (Rotherhithe)
Gnr. W. C. How, Royal Field Artillery (Willesden)
Gnr. J. Howarth, Royal Marine Artillery (Anfield)
Pte. E. Howe, RAMC (Richmond)
Cpl. W. G. Hawan, Royal Garrison Artillery (Wetherby)
Sgt. J. J. Howlett, Suffolk Regiment (Caens)
Sgt. H. Hubbard, RAMC (West Croydon)
Pte. A. Hudson, Cheshire Regiment (Gheadte Hulme)
Cpl. W. G. Hudson, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bedminster)
Gnr. G. Hughes, Royal Garrison Artillery (E. Cardiff)
Pte. J. Hughes, Rifle Brigade (Dunchurch)
Pte. R. Hughes, Labour Corps (Deganwy)
Bombr. R. J. Hughes, Royal Field Artillery (Baling)
Gnr. W. J. Hughes, Royal Field Artillery (Rhyl)
L. Cpl. F. C. Hulbert, Border Regiment (Kensal Rise)
Dvr. J. Hurdus, Royal Field Artillery (Oldham)
Sgt. J. Hurley, East Lancashire Regiment (Church)
Dvr. A. Ireland, Royal Field Artillery (St. Andrews)
Pte. J. Isherwood, Machine Gun Corps (Black-Burn)
Cpl. J. Jackson, Royal Engineers (Blackburn)
Sgt. J. A. Jackson, Royal Engineers (Knuteford)
L. Cpl. W. D. Jackson, Military Foot Police (Birmingham)
Dvr. G. Jarvis, Royal Field Artillery (Marley)
Pte. S. E. Jasper, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Gamelford)
Sgt. J. Jeffrey, Royal Field Artillery (Blackburn)
Gnr. W. J. Jessop, Royal Garrison Artillery (W. Kilburn)
L. Cpl. O. Jobson, Army Cyclist Corps (Newburn-on-Tyne)
Pte. A. E. Johnson, Yorkshire Regiment (Scarborough)
Pte. P. Johnson, London Regiment (Islington)
Pte. J. Johnson, Machine Gun Corps (Stockport)
Cpl. S. H. Johnson, London Regiment (Margate)
Pte. H. E. Joines, London Regiment (Banbury)
Pte. A. L. Jones, RAMC (Ferndale)
Gnr. R. Jones, Royal Garrison Artillery (Cardiff)
Act. Sgt. R. Jones, Gordon Highlanders (Liverpool)
Dvr. T. Jones, Royal Field Artillery (Orrell)
Pte. G. Kay, East Lancashire Regiment (Blackburn)
Pte. J. W. Kay, Manchester Regiment (Burnley)
Spr. E. J. A. Keairns, Royal Engineers (Urmston)
Cpl. E. Kearsley, Royal Field Artillery (Limerick)
Pte. J. B. Kearton, Northumberland Fusiliers (Butterknowle)
Pte. W. Kemp, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Camelon)
Cpl. C. A. Kemps, Royal Garrison Artillery (Biggieswade)
Sgt. J. Kendall, Worcestershire Regiment (Dudley)
L. Cpl. R. Kendrick, South Staffordshire Regiment (Walsall)
Pte. E. S. Kenward, Royal Sussex Regiment (Polegate)
L. Cpl. f. G. Kenwood, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Walworth)
Pte. W. Kenyon, Manchester Regiment (Royton)
Pte. J. Kerr, Machine Gun Corps (Kilmarnock)
Sgt. C. F. W. Kightley DCM Royal Engineers (Highgate, London)
Pte. A. S. Kilgour, London Regiment (Birmingham)
Sgt. A. Kimberley, RAMC (Slough)
Sgt. G. King, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers (Belfast)
Pte. W. G. King, Yorkshire Regiment (Gardham Etton)
Sgt. W. T. King, Royal Field Artillery (Walthamstow)
Pte. J. H. Kneale, East Lancashire Regiment (Barrow-in-Furness)
L. Cpl. W. E. Knowles, Yeomanry (Morecambe)
Pte. J. Laidler, Northumberland Fusiliers (Forest Hall)
L. Cpl. J. H. Lane, Yeomanry (Hartpury)
Pte. E. G. Laverick, London Regiment (Lambeth)
Spr. R. Lawlor, Royal Engineers (Wallsend-on-Tyne)
Sgt. A. E. Lawrence, Royal Field Artillery (Dalston, Carlisle)
Spr. R. Laws, Royal Engineers (Newcastle)
L. Cpl. F. C. Lax, Royal Engineers (Stockton-on-Tees)
Pte. J. Ledger, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Horley)
Pte. A. C. J. Lee, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Milton)
Sgt. G. Lee, Royal Field Artillery (Merton, London)
Pte. T. Lee, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Exeter)
Pte. B. Leeman, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Grimsby)
Pte. S. Leiken, Machine Gun Corps (Portsea)
Sgt. P. F. le Vedere, Royal Garrison Artillery (St. Aubins, Jersey)
Pte. A. E. Leversuch, London Regiment (Deptford)
L. Cpl. W. J. Lewis, Gloucestershire Regiment (Twickenham)
Sgt. W. T. Lewis, Royal Field Artillery (Roath)
Act. Cpl. W. Lilley, Royal Field Artillery (Ryhope)
Sgt. M. Limbrick, Royal Garrison Artillery (Australia)
Sgt. A. Livingston, Royal Field Artillery (Ballachulish)
Sgt. P. Loctett, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Gnr. J. Logan, Royal Field Artillery (Hebburn-on-Tyne)
Pte. E. V. Long, London Regiment (Hackney)
Spr. J. Longton, Royal Engineers (Chorley)
Pte. W. G. Lorraine, Gloucestershire Regiment (Colchester)
Pte. B. Lovell, Royal Sussex Regiment (Chatham)
Pte. G. E. R. Levering, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Poplar)
Sgt. J. R. Lowderi, Royal Garrison Artillery (Plympton)
Sgt. G. J. Lowry, Royal Field Artillery (Streatham Hill)
Pte. A. M. Lucas, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Coventry)
Sgt. E. Luke, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Wadebridge)
Pte. W. Mackie, Machine Gun Corps (Larkhall)
Pte. W. C. Madley, RAMC (Barnsbury, London)
Gnr. E. Mahy, Royal Field Artillery (St. Sampsons, Guernsey)
Cpl. F. Maidment, London Regiment (Salisbury)
Able Seaman A. Malkin, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Monkbretton)
Sgt.f. H. Manley, Royal Garrison Artillery (E. Taunton)
Spr. J. E. Mann, Royal Engineers (Hull)
Pte. L. P. Mansell, South Staffordshire Regiment (Burton-on-Trent)
Sgt. R. N. Marchant, RAMC (Sevenoaks)
Cpl. H. Marsn, Machine Gun Corps (Edge Hill)
Cpl. N. Marsh, Royal Field Artillery (Old Trafford)
Pte. C. Marshall, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Farnham)
Gnr. F. J. Marshall, Royal Garrison Artillery (Hayworthington)
Pte. J. Martin, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Thurlow)
Pte. C. Mason, Border Regiment (Manchester)
Pte. J. R. Matheson, Gordon Highlanders (Ullapool)
L. Cpl. J. Matthews, Devonshire Regiment (Witheridge)
Pte. G. Maughan, Northumberland Fusiliers (Beamish)
Pte. J. Maxwell, Northumberland Fusiliers (Gateshead)
Dvr. J. May, Royal Field Artillery (Sacriston)
Pte. J. W. May, Royal Engineers (Newcastle)
Pte. H. McCann, RAMC (Smithone Cry, by Glasgow)
Cpl. E. McCormick, Royal Field Artillery (Kirkdale)
Pte. M. J. McDermott, London Regiment (Dundalk)
Pte. R. McElroy, Border Regiment (Manchester)
Cpl. T. McGlynn, East Lancashire Regiment (Burnley)
Sgt. A. H. McGowan, Royal Field Artillery (Leith)
L. Cpl. J. A. McGrath, North Staffordshire Regiment (Lancaster)
Gnr. F. McHale, Royal Field Artillery (Bradford)
Spr. R. McHugh, Royal Engineers (South Shields)
Sgt. J. McManus, Manchester Regiment (Walkden)
Pte. J. McMillan, London Regiment (Glasgow)
Pte. P. McQuade, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers (Paisley)
Pte. M. Meehan, RAMC (Ferryhill)
Pte. W. Mellor, RAMC (Oldham)
Act. L. Cpl. W. V. Mercer, Machine Gun Corps (Garston)
L. Sgt. J. Merrington, Essex Regiment (Sutton, Bedfordshire)
Sgt. J. Merrins, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Balitore, County Kildare)
Pte. D. M. Meston, RAMC (Roslyn, Midlothian)
Pte. W. E. Metcalfe, Northumberland Fusiliers (Birtley)
Sgt. H. Mildenhall, Royal Field Artillery (Teddington)
Pte. W. R. Mills, Yeomanry (Enfield)
L. Cpl. R. Milne, Gordon Highlanders (Bridge of Marnock)
Gnr. D. Mitchell, Royal Field Artillery (Holywell Brook)
L. Cpl. G. W. Moat, Cheshire Regiment (Sheffield)
Dvr. H. Monk, Royal Field Artillery (Newport, Essex.)
L. Cpl. W. Monk, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Minehead)
L. Cpl. J. Moore, Royal Engineers (Looe)
Spr. W. H. Moore, Royal Engineers (Bristol)
Able Seaman W. E. Mordue, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Blyth)
Cpl. W. H. Morgan, Yorkshire Regiment (Middlesbrough)
Pte. J. W. Morris, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bethnal Green)
Sgt. T. Morris, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers (Moneymore)
Sgt. W. Morris, Manchester Regiment (Cohgleton)
Cpl. L. Mount, Machine Gun Corps (Barrowford)
Sgt. J. Mountain, Lincolnshire Regiment (Grimsby)
Cpl. W. Mountain, Royal Engineers (Sheffield)
Spr. J. Mullaney, Royal Engineers (Sligo)
Pte. J. B. Murdoch, Gordon Highlanders (Edinburgh)
L. Cpl. H. Nadin, Cheshire Regiment (Chesterfield)
Act. Lance Sergeant A. Nash, Gordon Highlanders (Altrincham)
Pte. H. W. Nash, Royal Marine Light Infantry (High Wycombe)
Pte. L. C. Newbury, North Staffordshire Regiment (Burtonn-Trent)
Spr. J. Newton, Royal Engineers (E. Lichfield)
Sgt. J. R. Newton, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bishop Auckland)
Pte. J. Nichols, London Regiment (Woolwich)
Cpl. R. Noonan, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Wigan)
Dvr. A. W. Norton, Royal Field Artillery (Walthamstow)
Sgt. W. A. Nowers, RAMC (Canterbury)
Pte. J. Olver, London Regiment (Forest Gate)
Pte. F. O'Sullivan, Lancashire Fusiliers (Newport)
Sgt. S. E. Oxborrow, Machine Gun Corps (Shirley)
Pte. F. J. N. Page, London Regiment (Kingston)
Gnr. W. Page, Royal Field Artillery (Pentonville)
Sgt. A. E. Palmer, Yorkshire Regiment (Peckharn)
Bombr. W. J. Palmer, Royal Garrison Artillery (Dover)
Cpl. T. Parish, London Regiment (Chelsea)
Sgt. W. Parkes, Royal Field Artillery (West Hartlepool)
Able Seaman G. Parkinson, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Ryton-on-Tyne)
L. Cpl. N. Parkinson, Machine Gun Corps (Wilsey)
Pte. A. L. Parry, Labour Corps (Bethesda)
L. Sgt. E. E. Parry, RAMC (Chorlton-on-Medlock)
L. Cpl. F. Parsons, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Oldham)
Pte. R.Patterson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Lesbury)
Sgt. H. Payne, Royal Field Artillery (Plymstock)
Pte. M. Payne, Manchester Regiment (Oldham)
Gnr. H. Peacock, Royal Field Artillery (Hebburn-on-Tyne)
Pte. J. H. Peacock, Border Regiment (Darlington)
Bombr. G. E. A. Peake, Royal Garrison Artillery (Peterborough)
Dvr. A. Pearce, Royal Field Artillery (Nettlestead)
Pte. C. K. Pearman, Northumberland Fusiliers (Cambridge)
Pnr. J. Pearson, Royal Engineers (Grimsby)
Pte. T. Pencott, Northumberland Fusiliers (Hexham-on-Tyne)
Gnr. J. Pennington, Royal Field Artillery (Eastbourne)
L. Sgt. W. H. Penrose, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Lamorna)
Act. Bombr. C. Perrett, Royal Field Artillery (E. Deptford)
L. Cpl. G. Peskett, Royal West Kent Regiment (Greenwich)
Gnr. F. G. Phelps, Royal Field Artillery (Box)
Sgt. H. Phipps, Gloucestershire Regiment (Little Compton)
Sgt. W. J. Pidgeon, Gloucestershire Regiment (Torquay)
Pte. D. Pilgrim, Machine Gun Corps (Sudbury)
Pte. C. J. Piper, Royal Fusiliers Bampstead)
L. Cpl. H. G. Pitcher, Royal Fusiliers (Hanwell)
Cpl. S. H. Platel, Royal Flying Corps (Brixton Hill)
Pte. R. Plumridge, RAMC (High Wycombe)
L. Cpl. S. F. Plush, Royal Engineers (S. Bermondsey)
Gnr. T. Pomfret, Royal Garrison Artillery (Lower Darwin)
Pte. G. R. Pooley, Yeomanry (Stoke Newington)
Petty Officer A. D. Porter, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Limehouse)
L. Cpl. E. A. Porter, London Regiment (Southwark)
Cpl. R. Pugh, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Tylorstown)
Pte. T. S. Purcell, RAMC (New York)
Gnr. J. W. Raine, Royal Field Artillery (Hebburn)
Cpl. A. Randall, North Staffordshire Regiment (Walsall)
Pte. S. Redford, London Regiment (Highgate)
L. Cpl. E. H. Redhead, London Regiment (Ilfoid)
Sgt. G. Redhead, Royal Engineers (Leamington)
Spr. G. Reece, Royal Engineers (Rainham)
Pte. G. W. Reed, Manchester Regiment (Chorlton-cum-Hardy)
Pnr. G. W. Rees, Royal Engineers (Grimsby)
Sgt. A. W. Reid, Royal Garrison Artillery (Old Kent Road, London)
Pte. A. Rhodes, Cheshire Regiment (Stockport)
Pte. C. Ribbits, Northumberland Fusiliers (Ratcliff)
Gnr. A. W. Richardson, Royal Garrison Artillery (Haswell, Oxford)
Pte. E. G. Richardson, London Regiment (Forest Gate)
Dvr. J. Richardson, Royal Field Artillery (Church)
Sgt. R. Ridpeath, Northumberland Fusiliers (Beal)
Sgt. L. J. Rivett, Royal Field Artillery (Stratford)
Pte. C. W. Roake, London Regiment (West Newington)
Spr. G. W. Roberts, Royal Engineers (Eastbourne)
Leading Seaman W. Roberts, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Larbert)
L. Cpl. T. Robertson, Royal Scots Fusiliers (Ayr)
Pte. L. A. Robeson, London Regiment (Anerley)
L. Cpl. J. Robinson, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Sgt. R. Roche, Leinster Regiment (Drogheda)
Pte. F. Rogers, Northumberland Fusiliers (Sheffield)
L. Cpl. F. A. Rogers, Gloucestershire Regiment (Pice)
L. Cpl. W. Rooney, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Bombr. S. Roper, Royal Field Artillery (Balham, London)
Pte. G. C. Ross, London Regiment (Poplar)
Sgt. W. R. Rowe, Machine Gun Corps (Devonport)
Cpl. F. W. Rowland, Labour Corps (East Ham)
Dvr. W. Rowlands, Royal Field Artillery (Conway)
Sgt. S. Rudd, Northumberland Fusiliers (Blythe)
Sgt. L. F. Rudlington, North Staffordshire Regiment (Burton-on-Ttent)
Pte. H. E. Rushton, RAMC (Ashbourne)
Pte. E. Russell, South Staffordshire Regiment (Darlaston)
Pte. F. Russell, London Regiment (St. James's)
Pte. A. Ryder, Machine Gun Corps (Preston)
Spr. M. O. Ryan, Royal Engineers (Limerick)
Pte. T. Salt, Royal Marine Light Infantry (Newcaatle-under-Lyme)
Pte. H. J. Sanders, RAMC (Kettering)
Pte. G. Sawyers, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Caterham Valley)
Gnr. A. Sayers, Royal Garrison Artillery (Glasgow)
Sgt. C. S. Scott, Royal Field Artillery (Rowlands)
Gnr. D. Scott, Royal Field Artillery (Glenisla)
L. Cpl. H. W. Scott, London Regiment (Walthamstow)
Pte. W. Scott, RAMC (Selkirk)
Spr. W. G. Scott, Royal Engineers (Exeter)
Pte. F. C. Scrivener, Middlesex Regiment (Hatfield Peverel)
Pte. W. F. Seals, Northumberland Fusiliers (Berwick)
Cpl. C. Sears, Labour Corps (Teddington)
L. Cpl. S. J. Sears, Royal West Kent Regiment (Wrotham Heath)
Pte. W. Shannon, RAMC (Derby)
Pte. A. Sharpe, North Staffordshire Regiment (Burton-on-Trent)
Pte. G. S. Sharp, North Lancashire Regiment (Wigan)
Spr. W. D. Sharp, Royal Engineers (Melrose)
Spr. E. Sheffield, Royal Engineers (Peterborough)
L. Cpl. G. H. Shepherd, Northumberland Fusiliers (Kirby-in-Ashfield)
Pte. W. Sheppard, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Penarth)
Sgt. A. V. Sheringham, Royal Garrison Artillery (London)
Act. Sgt. B. Shires, Yorkshire Regiment (West Hartlepodl)
Able Seaman F. Shilan, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Ashington)
Sgt. W. L. Shortridge, Royal Engineers (Bidworth)
Spr. E. Simmons, Royal Engineers (Blythe)
Petty Officer J. Simpson, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Pte. F. Sims, RAMC (E. Huddersfield)
Pte. W. M. Sinclair, Durham Light Infantry (Consett)
Sgt. R. E. Skinner, Royal Sussex Regiment (Hove)
Sgt. W. Skinner, Royal Horse Artillery (Inverness)
Pte. W. A. Skitter, London Regiment (Tottenham)
Spr. C. Smart, Royal Engineers (Dulwich)
Cpl. A. P. Smith, London Regiment (Motherwell)
Pte. C. Smith, Manchester Regiment (Stockport)
Gnr. C. L. Smith, Royal Field Artillery (Gatley)
Sgt. F. Smith, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Rye)
Spr. G. R. Smith, Royal Engineers (Sutton-on-Sea)
Pte. H. Smith, Manchester Regiment (Salford)
Spr. H. Smith, Royal Engineers (Walsall)
Pte. J. Smith, West Riding Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Company (E. York)
Pte. R. J. Smith, London Regiment (Fulham)
Dvr. T. Smith, Royal Field Artillery (Exeter)
Cpl. W. C. Smith, Northumberland Fusiliers (Wall-on-Tyne)
Pte. R. Snape, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Birkenhead)
Pte. F. Soden, Machine Gun Corps (Warwick)
Pte. H. Spence, RAMC (Oldham)
Dvr. R. Spence, Royal Field Artillery (Letham)
2nd Cpl. T. A. Spires, Royal Engineers (Newcastle)
Pte. H. C. Stables, RAMC (Halifax)
Gnr. H. O. Stacey, Royal Garrison Artillery (Box)
Pte. T. Stafford, RAMC (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Spr. W. Stanley, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Cpl. F. Staples, Royal Garrison Artillery (Crewkerne)
L. Sgt. H. Stedman, Lancashire Fusiliers (Burslem)
Pte. J. T. Steel, Northumberland Fusiliers (Alwick)
Pnr. R. Stephenson, Royal Engineers (Hull)
Cpl. F. J. Stevens, RAMC (Margate)
Pte. H. T. Stevens, East Surrey Regiment (E. Watford)
Dvr. H. Stevenson, Royal Field Artillery (Kilmaurs)
Dvr. Sergeant W. Stevenson, Scots Guards (Pimlico, London)
Gnr. J. Stoddart, Royal Garrison Artillery (E. Errogie)
Bombr. J. Stokoe, Royal Field Artillery (Hetton-le-Hole)
Gnr. C. E. Stone, Royal Field Artillery (Sutton-in-Ashfield)
Sgt. A. Story, Royal Field Artillery (Heaton)
Pte. J. A. Stott, Yeomanry (Slough)
Gnr. A. J. Stow, Royal Field Artillery (Upper Edmonton)
Pte. L. H. Stratton, Essex Regiment (Ecchinswell)
Pte. J. Stuart, Gordon Highlanders (Glasgow)
Pte. W. J. Sturdy, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Cpl. A. G. Swan, Royal Engineers (Northampton)
L. Cpl. R. Swann, Royal Engineers (Finsbury)
Dvr. W. Sweeney, Royal Field Artillery (Newport, Hon)
Bombr. A. Swinnerton, Royal Garrison Artillery (Stepney)
Dvr. C. Sullivan, Royal Field Artillery (Bexley Heath)
Pte. W. E. J. Sully, Royal Marine Light Infantry (Nailsbourne)
Pte. T. Taaffe, RAMC (Louth, County Lough)
Pte. S. Taft, Northumberland Fusiliers (Mansfield)
Pte. A. A. Tarr, Northumberland Fusiliers (Sheffield)
Cpl. F. A. Taylor, Royal Field Artillery (Gravesend)
Gnr. F. F. Taylor, Royal Garrison Artillery (Higginshaw)
Act. Sgt. J. Taylor, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers (Pembroke)
Cpl. R. Taylor, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Bangor)
Cpl. T. E. Taylor, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Pte. J. Tearce, RAMC (Newcastle)
Pte. J. Telford, Machine Gun Corps (Durham)
Pte. J. H. Terry, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Sgt. F. Tetiow, Lancashire Fusiliers (Oldham)
Pte. E. Thomas, Lancashire Fusiliers (Chester)
Gnr. M. Tierney, Royal Garrison Artillery (Ennis)
Cpl. W. B. Tiflen, Northumberland Fusiliers (Stocksfield-on-Tyne)
Gnr. A. E. Tilley, Royal Garrison Artillery (Peterboro)
Pte. W. Tilley, Machine Gun Corps (Great Bridge)
Pte. W. Timson, South Staffordshire Regiment (Leicester)
Pte. E. Titchener, Manchester Regiment (Lambeth, London)
Pte. J. W. Todd, Northumberland Fusiliers (Darlington)
Cpl. J. H. Topliss, Cheshire Regiment (Grimsby)
Pnr. T. C. Towers, Royal Engineers (Orkney)
L. Cpl. A. Tribe, Royal Engineers (E. Chatham)
Spr. W. Trodd, Royal Engineers (Wandsworth)
Dvr. H. E. Tucker, Royal Field Artillery (Sittingbourne)
L. Sgt. E. H. Tumner, London Regiment (Maiden)
Sgt. C. H. D. P. Turnbar, Royal Garrison Artillery (Southall)
Pte. A. J. Turton, Devonshire Regiment (Canning Town)
Sgt. A. J. Tyler, London Regiment (Tottenham)
Pte. C. H. Vick, London Regiment (Mortlake)
L. Sgt. J. Vigor, Royal Sussex Regiment (Burwash)
Pte. W. L. Vivian, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Perranwell)
Sgt. N. G. Wakeham, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Praze)
Cpl. G. Waldron, Labour Corps (Cardiff)
Cpl. H. W. Waldron, Lancashire Fusiliers (Droitwich)
Sgt. E. Walker, Cheshire Regiment (Liverpool)
L. Cpl. G. Walker, Manchester Regiment (Miles-Platting)
Cpl. S. Walker, Cheshire Regiment (Hunslet)
Gnr. W. L. Walker, Royal Field Artillery (Friockheim, N.B.)
Act. Cpl. T. Walsh, South Staffordshire Regiment (Wolverhampton)
Pte. A. Walton, Durham Light Infantry (Consett)
L. Cpl. G. Walton, London Regiment (Shepherd's Bush)
Gnr. J. W. Walton, Royal Garrison Artillery (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Act. Lance Sergeant J. W. Walton, Northumberland Fusiliers (Bishop Auckland)
Pte. W. Waring, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Welshpool)
Gnr. J. Waterhouse, Royal Field Artillery (Accrington)
Bombr. E. C. Waters, Royal Field Artillery (Stratford, London)
Pte. W. Watkinson, London Regiment (Portsmouth)
Pte. G. D. Watson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Chopwell)
Pte. W. H. Watson, London Regiment (Hackney)
Spr. W. Waugh, Royal Engineers (Reading)
Sgt. A. A. Weaver, RAMC (Kew Gardens)
Cpl. H. R. Webb, East Kent Regiment (Chatham)
Pte. T. Weisberg, London Regiment (Hackney)
Gnr. G. C. Welsford, Royal Garrison Artillery (Stonehouse)
Cpl. F. T. West, Yeomanry (Bedford)
L. Cpl. H. D. Westgarth, Northumberland Fusiliers (Newcastle)
Able Seaman W. Westlake, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Cardiff)
Gnr. H. W. White, Royal Field Artillery (Leyton)
Pte. L. Wigham, Northumberland Fusiliers (York)
Gnr. W. Wilberforce, Royal Field Artillery (Withernsea)
Spr. G. Willey, Royal Engineers (Exeter)
Dvr. J. William, Royal Field Artillery (Warwick)
Pte. A. A. J. Williams, London Regiment (Peckham, London)
Pte. F. F. Williams, Royal West Kent Regiment (Wandsworth, London)
Able Seaman J. C. Williams, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Swansea)
Pte. O. C. Williams, Lancashire Fusiliers (Manchester)
Cpl. H. Willis, Northumberland Fusiliers (West Wylam)
Pte. G. Wilmot, RAMC (Cullompton)
Cpl. G. H. Wilmott, Royal Engineers (Witney)
Pte. W. Willmott, Northumberland Fusiliers (Northampton)
Pte. H. T. Wills, Northumberland Fusiliers (Peckham)
Pte. A. W. Wilson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Littleport)
Dvr. G. Wilson, Royal Field Artillery (Urmston)
Pte. J. A. Wilson, Machine Gun Corps (Consett)
Spr. T. J. Wilson, Royal Engineers (Tunstall)
Gnr. W. Winkley, Royal Field Artillery (Clitheroe)
Pte. W. G. H. Winsor, London Regiment (Ladbroke Grove, London)
Pte. N. G. Witchell, Yeomanry (Horsley, near Nailsworth)
Sgt. J. Withinsnaw, Royal Field Artillery (New Seaham)
L. Cpl. W. Wood, Gordon Highlanders (Inverune)
Sgt. H. Woodbourne, Border Regiment (Manchester)
Pte. T. Woods, Lancashire Fusiliers (Preston)
Dvr. F. Woodward, Royal Field Artillery (Nottingham)
Pte. H. Woodward, South Staffordshire Regiment (Bulwell)
Act. Sgt. W. H. Worral, South Staffordshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. G. A. Wratten, Royal Sussex Regiment (Horeham Road)
Sgt. D. E. R. Wright, Northumberland Fusiliers (Newcastle)
L. Cpl. J. Wright, Royal Engineers (E. Chatham)
L. Cpl. W. R. Wright, Royal Engineers (Blackpool)
L. Cpl. J. Wych, Manchester Regiment (Hyde)
Pte. F. A. Wyllyams, RAMC (Bristol)
Pte.F. T. Yateo, Bedfordshire Regiment (Bletchly)
Pte. W. Yates, North Staffordshire Regiment (Burton-on-Trent)
Pte. T. Yeubrey, Manchester Regiment (Wolverhampton)
Pte. R. Abbott, Lancashire Fusiliers (Pendleton)
Pte. A. E. Adams, South Wales Borderers (Severn)
Pte. F. Adams, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Dover)
Pte. F. Adams, South Wales Borderers (Worcester)
Pte. J. T. Addison, Coldstream Guards (Billisdon)
Pte. D. Aitken, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (St. Ninian, Stirling)
Pte. F. C. Alder, RAMC (Birmingham)
Sgt. T. Aldridge, Lancashire Fusiliers (Salford)
Cpl. F. W, Alesworth, Machine Gun Corps (Hastings)
Act. Sgt. S. J. Alexander, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. H. S. Alford, Coldstream Guards (Coytrahene, near Bridgend)
L. Cpl. J. E. Alker, Lancashire Fusiliers (Holland Moor)
Able Seaman H. S. Allan, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Glasgow)
Sgt. C. H. Allen, Royal Field Artillery (Chatham)
Pte. C. L. Allen, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. R. Allen, Lancashire Fusiliers (Widnes)
Pte. C. Alline, South Wales Borderers (Barry Dock)
Pte. R. S. Anderson, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. T. Anderson, Royal Scots (Glasgow)
Pte. D. Andrews, Hampshire Regiment (Winchfield)
Bombr. T. E. Andrews, Royal Field Artillery (Deptford)
Pte. W. Arkell, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Bampton)
Pte. A. J. Arnold, Rifle Brigade (Walden)
Pte. A. Ashworth, Coldstream Guards (Brood Meadow Farm, Lancaster)
Pte. A. E. Ashburn, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Barrow-in-Furness)
Pte. G. Ashworth, North Lancashire Regiment (Wigan)
Pte. J. Ashton, Rifle Brigade (Preston)
Sgt. W. Ashcroft, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Sgt. J. Atkinson, Coldstream Guards (West Benwell-on-Tyne)
Cpl. J. T. Atkinson, Gloucestershire Regiment (Newent)
Pte. C. S. Auld, RAMC (Mersat)
Pte. T. D. Austin, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Sheffield)
Spr. A. L. Ayres, Royal Engineers (Launceston)
Pte. H. Bailey, Worcestershire Regiment (Walsall)
L. Cpl. J. E. Bailey, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bury)
Pte. W. K. Bailey, Worcestershire Regiment (Melton Mowbray)
Cpl. R. G. Baillie, Scots Guards (Aberdeen)
Pte. J. Baines, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Smethwick)
Sgt. E. Ball, Lancashire Fusiliers (Heywood)
Pte. G. Ball, Lancashire Fusiliers (Hindley)
Sgt. T. Ball, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. G. Banks, Liverpool Regiment (Manchester)
L. Cpl. T. Banks, Lancashire Fusiliers (Aspull)
Pte. J. Bann, Scots Guards (Winchburgh)
L. Cpl. F. W. Banner, Lancashire Fusiliers (Warrington)
Pte. F. Barber, Machine Gun Corps (Rochdale)
Sgt. D. Barker, Cheshire Regiment (Nantwich)
Pte. L. Barker, Manchester Regiment (Dukinfield)
Pte. A. J. Barlow, Welsh Guards (Kingsdown)
Pte. W. Barlow, Manchester Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. S. Barnes, Manchester Regiment (Oldham)
Gnr. C. H. Barr, Royal Field Artillery (Barnet)
Pte. E. G. Barr, Rifle Brigade (Kentish Town)
Pte. L. Barrett, London Regiment (Luton)
Pte. G. Barron, RAMC (Thatto Heath)
L. Sgt. B. Barrow, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Greenodd)
Pte. J. Barry, Manchester Regiment (Merthyr Tydvil)
Pte. H. H. Bartle, Lincolnshire Regiment (Stafford)
Pte. B. Batchelor, Manchester Regiment (Rochester)
Sgt. C. Bateman, Essex Regiment (Riseley)
Pte. W. Bath, Hampshire Regiment (Southampton)
Pte. P. G. Bavin, Essex Regiment (Bishops Stortford)
Pte. G. Baxter, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Growle)
Sgt. G. Baxter, Royal Scots Fusiliers (Glasgow)
Pte. H. Baxter, Lancashire Fusiliers (Great Harwood)
Pte. A. Bayles, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Barton)
Cpl. Fitter A. M. Bayley, Royal Field Artillery (Ipswich)
Pte. R. A. Bayliss, Hertfordshire Regiment (Bavendon)
Pte. W. Bayles, Durham Light Infantry (South Shields)
Cpl. A. N. Beard, Lancashire Fusiliers (Lower Kensal)
Pte. F. Beasley, RAMC (Birmingham)
Pte. E. Beckett, South Lancashire Regiment (Manchester)
Cpl. J. W. Beckham, Manchester Regiment (Arnfield Plain)
Pte. G. Beckett, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Burslem)
Sgt. H. Bell, North Lancashire Regiment (Preston)
L. Cpl. H. G. Bell, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Romford)
Pte. J. Bell, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Mansfield)
L. Cpl. J. Bell, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Durham)
Cpl. W. Bell, Essex Regiment (Southend)
Pte. T. Bellerby, East Yorkshire Regiment (Otley)
Pte. R. O. Bendall, Coldstream Guards (Wells)
Gnr. W. Bennett, Royal Field Artillery (Cardiff)
Pte. E. Bentley, Lancashire Fusiliers (Darwen)
Pte. G. Bentley, Worcestershire Regiment (Old Hill)
L. Cpl. W. Bentley, South Wales Borderers (Birmingham)
Pte. E. Berry, South Lancashire Regiment (St. Helens)
Pte. A. Bethell, East Kent Regiment (West Norwood, London)
Pte. B. Binks, Border Regiment (Ipswich)
Pte. J. H. Binedell, RAMC (Capetown)
Pte. G. E. Binns, Royal Fusiliers (Harringay)
Pte. G. Birchall, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Marton)
Pte. G. E. Birchett, East Kent Regiment (Lympne)
L. Cpl. W. C. Bird, Devonshire Regiment (Goodwood)
Gnr. A. C. Bish, Royal Garrison Artillery (Worthing)
Pte. W. M. Bishop, RAMC (Liverpool)
Pte. R. Black, Manchester Regiment (Great Ashfield)
Sgt. T. Blair, South Wales Borderers (Leamington)
Pte. H. J. Blake, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Andover)
Pte. R. F. Blankley, Royal Fusiliers (Brierley Hill)
Sgt. T. Blomeley, Lancashire Fusiliers (Manchester)
Pte. R. Blyth, RAMC (Dundee)
Sgt. S. Boardman, Manchester Regiment (Oldham)
Pte. W. Boarer, East Kent Regiment (Withyham)
L. Cpl. W. H. Boast, Machine Gun Corps (Peckham)
L. Cpl. H. Bolden, East Kent Regiment (Islington)
L. Cpl. R. Bolton, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Mindrum)
L. Cpl. G. H. J. Bond, Machine Gun Corps (Bath)
Pte. A. Booth, Lancashire Fusiliers (Elton)
Sgt. J. T. Booth, Durham Light Infantry (Wardley)
Pte. A. Bostock, Lancashire Fusiliers (Smithy Bridge)
Sgt. H. Botting, Machine Gun Guards (Tunbridge)
Sgt. C. Bouch, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Walden)
Pte. R. A. Bouckley, RAMC (Birmingham)
Sgt. E. R. Bourne, Machine Gun Corps (New Brompton)
Pte. W. Bower, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Sutton-in-Ashfield)
Pte. E. L. Boyd, Lancashire Fusiliers (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
L. Cpl. W. Boyd, Liverpool Regiment (Llandigai)
Pte. R. Boyton, Irish Guards (Boyle)
Pte. J. Bracegirdle, Lancashire Fusiliers (Ancoats)
Pte. T. Bramhill, Lancashire Fusiliers (Ince)
Cpl. J. Bradshaw, North Lancashire Regiment (Hindley)
Pte. E. Bray, Hampshire Regiment (Southsea)
Pte. H. Brazier, Hampshire Regiment (Micheldever)
L. Cpl. H. H. Briant, Machine Gun Corps (Hurstbourne)
Pte. C. E. Brierley, Manchester Regiment (Rusholme)
Pte. A. Brighton, Worcestershire Regiment (Kidderminster)
Cpl. W. Brett, Lancashire Fusiliers (Radcliffe)
Pte. D. Broatch, Lancashire Fusiliers (Longtown)
2nd Cpl. C. Brookes, Royal Engineers (New Barnet)
Pte. C. G. Brookes, Lancashire Fusiliers (Manchester)
Sgt. J. Brooks, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Carlow)
Gnr. A. Brown, Royal Field Artillery (Hucknall)
Sgt. E. Brown, Royal Irish Fusiliers (Downpatrick)
Dvr. E. F. Brown, Royal Field Artillery (Ipswich)
Pte. G. H. Brown, South Lancashire Regiment (Ebenezer, Cam.)
L. Cpl. J. Brown, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Watford)
Sgt. J. Brown, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Edinburgh)
Pte. P. Brown, Hampshire Regiment (Brighton)
Cpl. M. Browne, Irish Guards (Ballinamore)
Pte. W. Brown, East Yorkshire Regiment (Ferniegair)
Pte. W. Brownlie, Scottish Rifles (Burnbank)
Pte. E. Brownwood, RAMC (Burnley)
Pte. J. A. Buck, Middlesex Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Company (Baling)
Pte. W. Bunyan, Bedfordshire Regiment (Leighton Buzzard)
Sgt. W. J. Bunyan, Royal Field Artillery (Tooting, London)
Sgt. W. Burchell, Royal Field Artillery (South Tottenham)
Pte. F. E. Burgess, Durh. Lr. (Worcester)
Gnr. H. Burgess, Royal Field Artillery (Northwich)
Pte. H. Burgess, Manchester Regiment (Oldham)
Cpl. P. M. Burke, East Lancashire Regiment (Idle)
Pte. G. E. Burks, Royal Fusiliers (South Kelsey)
Pte. G. A. Burnage, RAMC (Stanley)
Cpl. J. Burns, Royal Garrison Artillery (Wigan)
Pte. J. T. Burns, North Lancashire Regiment (Preston)
Pte. A. G. Bushell, Middlesex Regiment (St. Lukes, London)
Pte. W. H. Bustin, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Leicester)
Pte. W. J. Butcher, Royal Fusiliers (Battersea)
L. Cpl. E. C. Butler, Yeomanry (New Maiden)
Pte. T. Butler, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Fethard)
Pte. C. H. Buzzard, Lancashire Fusiliers (Flucknall)
Pte. R. Cairnie, Royal Highlanders (Dundee)
Pte. L. Cairns, Lancashire Fusiliers (Burnley)
Pte. W. Cairns, Royal Scots (Fauldliouse)
Pte. H. F. Cake, Hampshire Regiment (Middle Southampton)
L. Cpl. W. D. Caldbeck, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
L. Cpl. S. A Callaway, RAMC (Slough)
Pte. W, Cameron, North Staffordshire Regiment (Dunblane)
Cpl. D. Campbell, Royal Scots (Dalmellington)
L. Cpl. H. Campbell, Machine Gun Corps (Dundee)
Pte. E. Cannon, Manchester Regiment (Cork)
Gnr. G. P. Carlton, A. Battery, Royal Field Artillery (St. Hunslett)
Pte. L. Carney, East Lancashire Regiment (Middlesbrough)
L. Cpl. G. W. Carpenter, Worcestershire Regiment (Steeple Aston)
Pte. S. Carr, York & Lancaster Regiment (Sheffield)
Sgt. P. C. Carter, Coldstream Guards (Reading)
L. Cpl. J. Carter, Durham Light Infantry (Quebec, County Durham)
Pte. P. J. Carter, Scots Guards (Brockley, London)
Pte. W. Carter, Machine Gun Corps (Preston)
Pte. W. Cartwright, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Gnr. G. H. Caterall, Royal Field Artillery (Great Harwood)
L. Cpl. T. Cayton, North Lancashire Regiment (Newton-le-Willows)
Pte. E. Chadderton, Liverpool Regiment (Oldham)
Cpl. A. Chadwick, East Lancashire Regiment (Darwin)
Cpl. J. Chadwick, Lancashire Fusiliers (Hulme)
Gnr. F. R. Chalk, Royal Field Artillery (Itchen Abbott)
Pte. H. W. Chalkley, Hertfordshire Regiment (Hitchin)
Pte. D. Challenor, RAMC (Achddw)
L. Sgt. J. Chantry, Manchester Regiment (Hindley Green)
Cpl. S. Chapman, Liverpool Regiment (Orrell)
Cpl. A. J. Charsley, Machine Gun Corps (Birmingham)
L. Cpl. H. C. Charters, Royal Fusiliers (Kingsland, London)
Pte. J. E. Chatburn, Lancashire Fusiliers (Ellesmere)
L. Cpl. T. Chester, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Askham-in-Furness)
Sgt. H. L. Cheston, Gloucestershire Regiment (Taunton)
L. Cpl. J. D. Cheyne, South Wales Borderers (Newport, Mon.)
Pte. A.J. Chidgey, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Bristol)
Pte. F. Child, Liverpool Regiment (Winewall)
Pte. S. H. Childs, Liverpool Regiment (Coten)
L. Cpl. E. Chillman, King's Royal Rifle Corps (London)
Pte. T. D. Clancy, Welsh Guards (Barry)
Pte. G. Clark, Hampshire Regiment (Hartlepool)
Pte. W. C. Clark, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. H. E. Clarke, Machine Gun Corps (Colchester)
Pte. J. Clarke, RAMC (Lochgelly)
Sgt. J. Clasper, Durham Light Infantry (Wingate)
L. Cpl. J. S. Claydon, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Haverhill)
L. Sgt. J. J. Clear, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
L. Cpl. R. C. Clough, Royal Engineers (Stretford)
Pte. A. H. Clucas, East Yorkshire Regiment (Sheffield)
Pte. G. Clues, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. H. G. Coates, Machine Gun Corps (Bolton)
Sgt. J. B. Coates, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Act. Bombr. E. J. H. Cockell, Royal Field Artillery (Upper Sydenham, London)
Sgt. H. Cocks, Machine Gun Corps (Hawkwell)
Cpl. E. J. Cole, Royal Fusiliers (Chiswick)
Pte. J. Cole, Royal Fusiliers (East Sheen)
Pte. W. Cole, Scots Guards (West Norwood)
Sgt. G. Collard, Somerset Light Infantry (Taunton)
Sgt. A. Collier, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Sgt. C. Collins, Manchester Regiment (Didsbury)
Pte. E. D. Collins, RAMC (Middlesbrough)
L. Cpl. J. Connor, Manchester Regiment (Warrington)
Pte. W. Cook, Worcestershire Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. E. Cooper, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Chesterfield)
Sgt. E. Cooper, Worcestershire Regiment (Bridgnorth)
Bombr. I. Cooper, Royal Field Artillery (Swinton)
Dvr.P. Cooper, Royal Field Artillery (Southampton)
Pte. R. W. Cooper, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Burbage)
Sgt. T. J. Coppell, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Battersea, London)
Pte. W. Cork, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Warrington)
Cpl. J. Corless, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. E. Cornwall, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
L. Cpl. A. Corson, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Kirkgunzeon)
Sgt. A. L. Corson, Royal Flying Corps (Welland, Ontario, Canada)
Cpl. F. A. Cotterill, Gloucestershire Regiment (Smethwick)
Sgt. B. E. Cottrell, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Walsall)
Pte. F. Coupe, North Lancashire Regiment (Preston)
Pte. J. Cowey, Northumberland Fusiliers (Coundon)
Dvr. T. Cowie, Army Service Corps (Salford)
L. Cpl. J. H. Cowley, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Pte. G. W. Company, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Crowle)
Sgt. H. Cox, Liverpool Regiment (Blackpool)
Pte. O. Crack, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Cherry Hinton)
Pte. R. L. Craigs, Army Service Corps (Bedlington)
Pte. T. Craner, Coldstream Guards (Stonehouse Arley)
Sgt. H. Craven, Royal Field Artillery (Rotherne)
Bombr. T. Craven, Royal Field Artillery (Blackburn)
Sgt. C. Crealy, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Rathmines)
Pte. M. Creaser, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Sheffield)
Gnr. W. J. Crebbin, Royal Garrison Artillery (Colbey, Isle of Man)
Pte. A. E. Crocker, King's Own Scottish Borderers (South Croydon)
Sgt. B. Crosby, Liverpool Regiment (Conway)
L. Cpl. C. G. Cross, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Cambridge)
Sgt. W. Cross, South Lancashire Regiment (St. Helens)
Gnr. L. G. Crossby, Royal Garrison Artillery (Southampton)
Pte. H. Crothers, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Boston, U.S.A.)
Cpl. A. Cruickshanks, King's Own Scottish Borderers (E Huntly, N.B.)
Pte. H. R. Cullam, South Staffordshire Regiment (Grimsby)
Pte. L. Cundy, Lancashire Fusiliers (S. Austell)
Pte. D. Cunningham, North Lancashire Regiment (Derrylaheen)
Pte. G. Cutler, Border Regiment (Forest Gate)
L. Cpl. W. Daley, Lancashire Fusiliers (Pendlebury)
Pte. H T. A. Dane, Royal Fusiliers (Edmonton)
Pte. E. Dadderton, Liverpool Regiment (Oldham)
W. C. Daniels, RAMC (Chelmsford)
Cpl. D. M. Davies, East Lancashire Regiment (Llanpeter)
Pte. E. Davies, Manchester Regiment (Oldham)
Pte. E. S. Davies, Welsh Guards (Llandynog)
Cpl. H. Davies, Worcestershire Regiment (Worcester)
L. Cpl. T. Davies, Lancashire Fusiliers (Pendleton)
Pte. W. H. Davies, Royal Berkshire Regiment (Waiworth, London)
Pte. A. Davenport, Lancashire Fusiliers (Harpurhey)
Sgt. F. H. Davenport, Manchester Regiment (Northfleet)
L. Cpl. F. E. Davis, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Harrow)
Pte. J. E. Deakin, Yeomanry (Surbiton)
Pte. J. Dean, Liverpool Regiment (Bootle)
Pte. G. S. Deeley, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
L. Cpl. R. Deeming, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Polesworth Common)
Cpl. R. Defty, Durham Light Infantry (Seaham Harbour)
Cpl. J. Delaney, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (E. Carlow)
Pte. A. Dennison, Royal Scots (Pencaitland)
Cpl. G. Devey, Grenadier Guards (Mansfield)
Sgt. J. Dick, Liverpool Regiment (Wallasey)
L. Cpl. A. Dickens, Lincolnshire Regiment (Spalding)
Pte. J. Dickenson, Manchester Regiment (Salford)
C.Q.M.S. J. Dickinson, Lancashire Fusiliers (Newton Heath)
Sgt. R. Dickinson, East Lancashire Regiment (Tabden)
Gnr. O. E. Diggett, Royal Field Artillery (Wednesbury)
Pnr. D. Dillon, Royal Engineers (Scarva)
Sgt. R. Dinsdale, RAMC (Lindfield)
Pte. A. C. Diss, Manchester Regiment (Swansea)
Sgt. J. Dixon, Royal Irish Fusiliers (Ballybay)
Cpl. F. Dobbs, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Boston)
Pte. W. Dobson, East Yorkshire Regiment (Bradford)
J. Dolan, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Kirkham)
Pte. J. Dolan, Lancashire Fusiliers (Liverpool)
Pte. T. Donohoe, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Dublin)
Sgt. J. Donovan, Lancashire Fusiliers (Manchester)
Pte. J. H. Donnelly, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
1st Class A. Mechanic H. Doran, Royal Flying Corps (Belfast)
Cpl. T. Dowbekin, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Cpl. F. Downs, Machine Gun Corps (Liverpool)
Sgt. T. Downs, Manchester Regiment (Salford)
Sgt. H. Doyle, Machine Gun Corps (Glasgow)
Pte. P. Doyle, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Leighlin Bridge)
Sgt. E. E. Drake, Royal Fusiliers (Brighton)
Pte. H. Drinkwater, Lancashire Fusiliers (Heywood)
Pte. W. Drummond, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Act. Sgt. J. Drury, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Langley Mill)
Gnr. F. W. Dugan, Royal Field Artillery (Portemouth)
Pte. D. Duffield, Grenadier Guards (Dorking)
Spr. O. Duke, Royal Engineers (St. Blazey)
L. Cpl. O. St. A. Duke, Royal Fusiliers (Antigua, British West Indies)
Pte. E. Dunn, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Pte. D. Dunne, Irish Guards (Belfast)
Sgt. A. Dunster, Machine Gun Corps (Bexhill)
Sgt. F. Durbin, Shropshire Light Infantry (Treharris)
Pte. D. Duthie, Scots Guards (Yateley)
Pte. H. Dutton, East Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
L. Sgt. A. Duxbury, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bury)
Sgt. T. Dyson, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. J. Eadie, Scots Guards (Musselburgh)
Pte. E. Eagle, Worcestershire Regiment (Birmingham)
Gnr. S. Earnshaw, Royal Garrison Artillery (Clapham)
Cpl. G. T. Eaton, Machine Gun Corps (Manchester)
Pte. H. Eaton, Manchester Regiment (Dukinfield)
Pte. J. C. Eccles, Manchester Regiment (Hoylake)
Pte. D. Edger, Lancashire Fusiliers (Cresswell)
Pte. E. Edgerton, Lancashire Fusiliers (Heywood)
Pte. F. R. Edgerton, Rifle Brigade (Clerkenwell)
Pte. A. Edmonds, Machine Gun Corps (Prestonpans)
Sgt. E. Edwards, Liverpool Regiment (Formby)
Cpl. J. E. Edwards, Lancashire Fusiliers (Nelson)
Sgt. J. H. Edwards, Liverpool Regiment (Southport)
Sgt. J. S. Edwards, South Lancashire Regiment (Widnes)
Pte. R. W. Edwards, South Wales Borderers (Songhall Massey)
Sgt. T.H. Edwards, Royal Field Artillery (Abercynon)
Pte. E. Eggie, Scots Guards (Blairgowrie)
L. Cpl. P. S. Elkins, Hertfordshire Regiment (Apsley)
Pte. A. Elson, East Kent Regiment (Wandsworth)
L. Cpl. M. Elliot, Cameron Highlanders (E. Perth)
Pte. O. R. Elliott, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Derbyshire)
Pte. C. Ellis, Royal Engineers (Croydon)
Pte. F. C. H. Ellis, Machine Gun Corps (Sydenham)
Pte. E. Else, Bedfordshire Regiment (Hitchen)
Bombr. J. K. English, Royal Field Artillery (Dundonald)
Sgt. T. Entwistle, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bury)
L. Cpl. G. W. Etheridge, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Whittlesey)
Pte. J. H. Evans, Shropshire Light Infantry (Ludlow)
Sgt. W. G. Evans, Machine Gun Corps (Wolverhampton)
Pte. G. Evanson, Machine Gun Corps (Drayton)
Pte. H. Everall, RAMC (Malvern Link)
Sgt. H. Everard, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Cpl. H. Everett, Yeomanry (Balham)
L. Cpl. B. Evis, Somerset Light Infantry (Ogmore Vale)
Cpl. W. Fail, Royal Field Artillery (Hetton-le-Hole)
Pte. D. Falcke, Scots Guards (Holborn, London)
Sgt. R. Falconer, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
A. Cpl. R. Falconer, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Falkirk)
Pte. J. W. Fallon, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
L. Cpl. W. Fallows, Lancashire Fusiliers (Middleton)
Sgt. J. W. Farmer, Machine Gun Corps (Bradford)
Sgt. J. M. Farquharson, Machine Gun Corps (Aberdeen)
Pte. H. Farrington, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
L. Cpl. T. Farrington, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Cambridge)
L. Sgt. J. Faulkner, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Oxford)
Pte. W. Faulkner, Cheshire Regiment (Birmingham)
L. Cpl. W. Fells, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bolton)
Dvr. A. Fenwick, Royal Engineers (Burwell, near Louth)
Sgt. A. O. Ferguson, Manchester Regiment (Laceby)
Sgt. D. Field, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Warwick)
Gnr. F. C. Field, Royal Field Artillery (East Greenwich, London)
Pte. A. J. Fisher, Army Cyclist Corps (Twickenham)
Staff Sergeant H. Fisher, RAMC (Abbots Langley)
Pte. H. Fisher, Lancashire Fusiliers (Preston)
L. Cpl. H. F. Fisher, Manchester Regiment (Swansea)
Pte. L. Fisher, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Rotherham)
Pte. T. C. Fisher, Lancashire Fusiliers (Leytonstone)
Pte. T. Fitzgerald, Scots Guards (Limerick)
Pte. J. Fleming, North Lancashire Regiment (Irlam)
Pte. J. Fleming, Machine Gun Corps (Derry)
Pte. T. Fletcher, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bury)
Sgt. T. Fletcher, Coldstream Guards (South Yardley)
L. Cpl. C. Flowers, East Kent Regiment (Great Stanmore)
Cpl. H. Floyd, Royal Fusiliers (Bowes Park)
Pte. G. Foley, Cheshire Regiment (Hyde)
Pte. J. Foley, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Fermoy)
Gnr. A. Forbes, Royal Field Artillery (Huntly)
Spr. J. Forrest, Royal Engineers (Dennis Town)
Pte. A. W. Foskett, Kings Royal Rifle Corps (Battersea)
Pte. L. Foster, Northumberland Fusiliers (Felling-on-Tyne)
Sgt. F. Fotheringham, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Pte. H. E. Foulger, Machine Gun Corps (Newnham)
Gnr. F. P. Fountaine, Royal Garrison Artillery (Teeton)
Sgt. A. H. Fox, RAMC (Stockport)
Pte. O. Fox, Royal Dublin Fusiliers, attd. Machine Gun Company (Kildorney)
Cpl. F. Fox, East Lancashire Regiment (Ancoats)
Pte. T. H. Francis, RAMC (Greenwich)
Cpl. J. C. Fraser, Coldstream Guards (Ghiswick)
Pte. M. W. Free, Essex Regiment (Southend)
L. Cpl. J. Freeland, Royal Scots (Aberdeen)
Sgt. A. Freer, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Arnold)
Pte. H. French, Scots Guards (Glasgow)
Sgt. J. French, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Stonehouse, N.B.)
Bombr. A. Frith, Royal Field Artillery (Dewsbury)
Pte. W. Fry, Coldstream Guards (Hoxton, London)
Pte. R. Fuller, Rifle Brigade (Barking)
Pte. M. Furey, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. R. Gabriel, Royal Engineers (St. Helens)
Pte. G. Galley, Manchester Regiment (Oldham)
Spr. F. Gallimore, Royal Engineers (Averley)
Pte. W. Gallimore, Liverpool Regiment (New-Brighton)
Pte. R. Gammon, Rifle Brigade (Regents Park, London)
Sgt. C. Gardiner, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Scarcliffe)
Pte. A. Gardner, North Staffordshire Regiment (Longriggend)
Pte. C. W. E. Gardner, Somerset Light Infantry (Chard)
Pte. A. J. Garlick, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Kettering)
L. Cpl. W. T. Garnett, Manchester Regiment (Salford)
Pte. L. Garside, Depot, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Huddersfield)
Sgt. S. A. E. Gathern, Gloucestershire Regiment (Bermondsey)
L. Cpl. F. Gatley, Liverpool Regiment (Shaw)
Pte. A. Gauld, Gordon Highlanders (Glass, Aberdeen)
Cpl. G. H. Gawler, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Pte. W. Gaywood, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. W. Geeves, Lancashire Fusiliers (Tooting, London)
Sgt. F. H. George, Machine Gun Corps (Sidcup)
L. Cpl. G. A. Gibbs, Grenadier Guards (Ashbourne)
Pte. T. Gibbs, Welsh Guards (Newport, Mon.)
Pte. A. Gibson, Machine Gun Corps (Liverpool)
Cpl. G. Gifford, Royal Garrison Artillery (Shelford)
L. Cpl. M. Gilbride, Liverpool Regiment (Ditton)
L. Cpl. T. Gill, Liverpool Regiment (Newburgh)
Pte. W. Gillions, Royal Fusiliers (Gamlin
Sgt. H. J. Gillott, Yeomanry (Cromford)
L. Cpl. A. Gilmore, York & Lancaster Regiment (Blackburn)
Pte. H. Ginger, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Pte. C. Glacken, Irish Guards (Kells)
Pte. J. G. Gleadhall, York & Lancaster Regiment (Rotherham)
Pte. A. E. Glover, Hertfordshire Regiment (Boxmoor)
Pte. H. Goddard, East Kent Regiment (Wabberswich)
Act. L. Cpl. F. E. Godwin, Worcestershire Regiment (Evesham)
Sgt. J. M. Goodfellow, Coldstream Guards (Crook, Durham)
Pte. C. J. H. Goodwin, North Lancashire Regiment (Liverpool)
L. Cpl. F. Goodwin, Royal Fusiliers (Longton)
Pte. J. Gordon, Royal Highlanders (Dundee)
Sgt. W. Gordon, Manchester Regiment (Beswick)
Cpl. C. Gore, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. T. Gore, Lancashire Fusiliers (Wigan)
L. Cpl. F. Gorton, North Lancashire Regiment (Chorley)
Pte. A. Gosling, Hampshire Regiment (Winchester)
L. Cpl. W. F. Gosson, Middlesex Regiment (Willesden)
Pte. W. Gough, Worcestershire Regiment (Stourbridge)
L. Cpl. E. Goulding, Lincolnshire Regiment (Lincoln)
Pte. J. H. Govan, Scots Guards (Prestonkirk)
Pte. L. Gleave, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Rochdale)
Pte. L. Grace, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Clontarf)
Pte. C. Graham, Royal Scots (Kirkintillock)
Pte. T. Graham, Border Regiment (Carlisle)
Pte. F. Grant, Scots Guards (Greenham)
Sgt. F. G. Gray, Royal Field Artillery (Roydon)
Cpl. H. Gray, Royal Engineers (West Hartlepool)
Pte. J. S. Gray, Gordon Highlanders (Banchory)
Pte. G. Greaves, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Balborough)
L. Cpl. A. H. Green, Royal Engineers (Notting Hill)
Sgt. J. V. Green, RAMC (Handsworth)
Sgt. J. W. Green, Manchester Regiment (Oldham)
Act. Cpl. S. Green, South Lancashire Regiment (St. Helens)
Pte. W. Greenan, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Irvine)
Pte. T. Greenhalgh, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Pte. R. Greenwood, North Lancashire Regiment (Bradshaw)
Cpl. D. S. Greer, Royal Highlanders (Glasgow)
Pte. W. H. Gregory, Manchester Regiment (Didsbury)
Sgt. T. Griffin, East Yorkshire Regiment (Market Rasen)
Pte. A. Griffiths, Coldstream Guards (Cottage Mold)
Gnr. E. Griffiths, Royal Field Artillery (Porthmadog)
L. Cpl. J. Griffiths, Worcestershire Regiment (Wollaston)
Pte. R. J. Griffiths, Worcestershire Regiment (Madeley)
Act. Bombr. J. Grimmond, Royal Garrison Artillery (Edinburgh)
Cpl. C. Grognet, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Pte. H. Groves, Scots Guards (Liverpool)
L. Cpl. E. Grubb, Bedfordshire Regiment (Luton)
Cpl. E. J. Gruncell, Royal Engineers (Tottenham)
Sgt. G. Grundy, East Lancashire Regiment (Colchester)
Pte. J. Grundy, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bury)
Pte. W. Gunner, Royal Fusiliers (Banning)
Pte. W. G. Gurney, Machine Gun Corps (Ross)
Cpl. J. Gwinnutt, Lancashire Fusiliers (Rochdale)
Pte. F. Hack, Hampshire Regiment (Headley)
L. Sgt. G. S. Hacking, Cheshire Regiment (Gilesmere Port)
Cpl. W. Hagger, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Bethnal Green)
Pte. B. R. Hall, Middlesex Regiment (Paddington)
Pte. M. Hall, Worcestershire Regiment (Stourbridge)
Pte. T. Hall, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bolton)
Cpl. T. J. Hall, Durham Light Infantry (Lanchester)
Sgt. P. W. Halls, Royal Field Artillery (Ilfbrd)
2nd Cpl. J. Hallsall, Royal Engineers (St. Helens)
L. Cpl. C. Hamilton, Machine Gun Corps (Harrow Road)
Act. Bombr. J. Hancock, Royal Garrison Artillery (Cardiff)
Pte. J. H. Handley, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Sgt. J. Hands, South Lancashire Regiment (St. Helens)
Pte. H. F. Hanes, Grenadier Guards (Manchester)
Pte. R. Hankin, Liverpool Regiment (Litherland)
Sgt. A. Hannah, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Kilmarnock)
Spr. J. Hannaway, Royal Engineers (Fulham)
Pte. M. Hanney, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bruree)
Pte. A. Harborne, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. V. Harding, Liverpool Regiment (Southport)
C.Q.M.S. A. Hardman, Lancashire Fusiliers (Middleton)
Pte. R. Hardman, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Pte. H. Hardwick, Coldstream Guards (Hull)
Cpl. F. Hardy, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Bombr. W. Hargreaves, Royal Field Artillery (Burnley)
L. Cpl. J. Harkin, East Lancashire Regiment (Blackburn)
Sgt. J. A. Harley, Glamorgan Royal Garrison Artillery (Cadoxton)
Pte. J. Harpham, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Nottingham)
Pte. J. Harrigan, East Kent Regiment (Chatham)
Sgt. A. E. Harris, Honourable Artillery Company (Exeter)
Pte. B. Harris, Worcestershire Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. G. E. Harris, Machine Gun Corps (Upper Edmonton)
Cpl. G. W. Harris, Royal Field Artillery (Leamington)
Pte. H. Harris, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Peckham)
Sgt. J. Harris, Worcestershire Regiment (Warminster)
A. L. C. F. W. Harrison, Lancashire Fusiliers (Atherton)
Cpl. G. B. Harrison, Royal Field Artillery (E. Woolwich)
Pte. P. Harrison, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool
Pnr. R. Harrison, Royal Engineers (Stretford)
Cpl. R. C. Harrison, Manchester Regiment (West Houghtoh)
Pte. W. Harrison, Cheshire Regiment (Crewe)
Pte. G. Hartley, North Lancashire Regiment (Chorley)
L. Cpl. L. Hartley, Rifle Brigade (Langshaw Bridge)
Pte. O. Hartwell, RAMC (Harrowden)
Pte. T. Harvey, Lancashire Fusiliers (Stoke Newington)
Sgt. A. E. Harwood, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. A. Hasty, East Lancashire Regiment (Padiham)
L. Sgt. C. G. Hatton, Grenadier Guards (Bermondsey, London)
Bombr. J. Hatton, Royal Field Artillery (Kirkby)
Pte. A. T. Hawker, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
L. Sgt. H. Hawksworth, Coldstream Guards (Sheffield)
L. Cpl. J. J. Hayes, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Warsop)
Pte. E. Haysham, Somerset Light Infantry (Bridgwater)
Pte. C. Haywood, Worcestershire Regiment (Dudley)
Pte. F. A. V. Haywood, Machine Gun (Corps (Byfleet)
Cpl. B. Hazlewood, Hampshire Regiment (Coventry)
Pte. R. Hazzard, Royal Berkshire Regiment (Portsea)
Dvr. W. Healey, Royal Field Artillery (Bolton)
L. Sgt. J. W. Healy, Manchester Regiment (Old Trafford)
Pte. W. E. Heard, Machine Gun Corps (E. Barnstaple)
L. Cpl. P. T. Heath, South Wales Borderers (Machen)
Cpl. J. Heaton, North Lancashire Regiment (Wigan)
L. Cpl. E. Hedges, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Bramford)
Sgt. W. Hedley, Somerset Light Infantry (Amble)
Cpl. W. Heeley, Liverpool Regiment (Bootle)
Dvr. J. D. Henderson, Royal Field Artillery (Ford)
Pte. P. Henri, Liverpool Regiment (Birkenhead)
Sgt. J. Henshaw, Liverpool Regiment (Bootle)
Pte. J. F. Hertwick, Lancashire Fusiliers (Blyth)
L. Cpl. C. T. Hewitt, Machine Gun Corps (Norfolk)
Pte. W. Hicks, Manchester Regiment (Llantrisant)
Pte. J. Higgins, East Kent Regiment (Sandwich)
Sgt. J. Higham, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. R. L. Highmore, Royal Engineers (Old Kent Rd., London)
Pte. A. C. Hill, Worcestershire Regiment (Worcester)
Cpl. J. Hill, Machine Gun Corps (Perth)
Pte. J. Hill, King's Royal Rifle Corps (London)
Pte. S. Hill, Worcestershire Regiment (Old Hill)
Cpl. E. Hillock, Irish Guards (Wexford)
Sgt. R. Hinde, Manchester Regiment (Shepherd's Bush)
C.Q.M.S. W. G. Hinds, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Ulverston)
Pte. A. W. Hinxman, Army Service Corps (Chiswick, London)
Cpl. W. F. Hippmann, Royal Fusiliers (Fulham)
L. Cpl. G. Hiron, Worcestershire Regiment (Worcester)
Pte. N. Hirst, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Golcar)
Pte. G. W. Hobbs, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (Handslope)
Pte. E. Hobson, York & Lancaster Regiment (Edmonton, Alberta, Canada)
Pte. F. Hodgson, RAMC (York)
Pte. R. W. Hodgson, Lancashire Fusiliers (Nitherton)
Pte. F. Hodson, RAMC (Burton Latimer)
Sgt. E. Holbeche, Royal Field Artillery (Button Coldfield)
Pte. W. H. Holden, East Lancashire Regiment (Accrington)
Sgt. G. Holland, Cheshire Regiment (Stockport)
Pte. J. Holland, Hertfordshire Regiment (Harpenden)
Gnr. A. Hollingworth, Royal Field Artillery (Warrington)
Pte. J. Hollis, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Mansfield)
Sgt. F. Holloway, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. J. E. Holmes, Lancashire Fusiliers (Carlisle)
Dvr. O. J. Holmes, Royal Field Artillery (Wimbledon)
Pte. P. S. Holmes, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (South Normanton)
Pte. G. W. Holt, Lancashire Fusiliers (Radcliffe)
Pte. J. Holt, Lancashire Fusiliers (Patricroft)
Pte. A. Hooper, Hampshire Regiment (Southampton)
Sgt. J. Hope, Durham Light Infantry (Chester-le-Street)
Pte. H. Hopkin, Machine Gun Corps (Grimsby)
Pte. J. Hotchin, Lincolnshire Regiment (Scunthorpe)
Pte. H. B. Hotchkiss, South Lancashire Regiment (Widnes)
Pte. N. Hough, RAMC (Alderney)
Act. Cpl. R. Houghton, South Lancashire Regiment (St. Helens)
Cpl. E. Howard, Lancashire Fusiliers (Southwark)
Cpl. F. Howard, East Kent Regiment (Sandwich)
Pte. J. Howe, Manchester Regiment (Pontardawe)
L. Cpl. R. J. Howorth, Lancashire Fusiliers (Denshaw)
Pte. G. Hubball, Cheshire Regiment (Northwich)
Sgt. H. O. Hubbards, Welsh Regiment (Cardiff)
Pte. J. H. Hughes, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. T. Hughes, Liverpool Regiment (Miles Platting)
Pte. T. Humphreys, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Pte. G. F. Hunt, Liverpool Regiment (Skipton)
Pte. J. W. Hunt, Lancashire Fusiliers, attd. Machine Gun Company (Wormer Bridge)
Pte. J. J. Hunter, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Maxwelltown)
L. Cpl. C. Hurrell, Machine Gun Corps (Peterborough)
Pte. E. Hurst, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Pte. W. Hutchinson, York & Lancaster Regiment (Denaby Main)
Sgt. H. Hyam, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. E. Ingham, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bradford)
Cpl. A. I. Ingram, Scots Guards (Edinburgh)
L. Cpl. R. H. Ingram, Royal Fusiliers (Richmond)
Pte. A. Insley, Manchester Regiment (Stanton)
Cpl. W. F. Irving, Border Regiment (Carlisle)
L. Cpl. A. Ison, Machine Gun Corps (Raynes Park)
Pte. A. Jackson, Lancashire Fusiliers (Rhodes)
Pte. E. T. Jackson, Machine Gun Corps (Leeds)
Pte. J. Jackson, Border Regiment (Maryport)
Cpl. J. Jackson, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Berraondsey)
Pte. T. E. Jackson, Liverpool Regiment (Ashton-under-Lyne)
Sgt. T. R. Jackson, RAMC (St. Helens)
Pte. F. Jacob, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (E. Coventry)
Pte. J. James, Royal Fusiliers (Bethnal Green)
Pte. R. W. James, Lancashire Fusiliers (Hamsterley Colliery)
Pte. H. Jenkins, Welsh Regiment (Cardiff)
Sgt. S. Jenner, Manchester Regiment (Old Trafford)
Pte. P. Jennings, Royal Fusiliers, attd. Machine Gun Company (Bradford)
Pte. H. H. Jerram, Hampshire Regiment (Winchester)
Dvr. J. Jessop, Army Service Corps (Beverley)
Dvr. C. H. Jewkes, Royal Field Artillery (Dudley)
Pte. A. Jeynes, Machine Gun Corps (Tewkesbury)
Sgt. A. Johnson, Cheshire Regiment (Hyde)
Cpl. A. E. Johnson, Welsh Guards (Stoke-sub-Hambdon)
Pte. A. J. Johnson, Machine Gun Corps (Leighton)
Pte. A. W. Johnson, Coldstream Guards (Hull)
Pte. E. Johnson, Coldstream Guards (Hull)
Sgt. H. Johnson, Royal Fusiliers (Burslem)
Pte. H. P. Jonnson, Manchester Regiment (Mancheater)
Pte. W. Johnson, Liverpool Regiment (Southport)
Pte. W. H. Johnson Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Holme Chapel)
Pte. J. Jolly, Royal Highlanders (Montrose)
Pte. R. Jolly, Rifle Brigade (East Greenwich)
Gnr. A. Jones, Royal Garrison Artillery (Bangor)
Gnr. C. Jones, Royal Field Artillery (Ris-Ca)
Pte. F. Jones, South Wales Borderers (Curnfilinfach)
Pte. G. L. Jones, Liverpool Regiment (New Brighton)
Pte. H. Jones, Lancashire Fusiliers (Lr. Broughton)
Pte. L. Jones, North Lancashire Regiment (Rhos)
Cpl. L. Jones, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
2nd Cpl. R. J. Jones, Royal Engineers (E. Chatham)
Pte. T. Jones, RAMC (Brymbo)
Pte. T. E. Jones, North Lancashire Regiment (Oswestry)
Pte. V. S. Jones, Yeomanry (Derby)
Dvr. W. J. Jones, Royal Field Artillery (Meath)
F. Jordan, East Yorkshire Regiment (Wolverhampton)
L. Cpl. F. Kay, Machine Gun Company (Keighley)
Pte. J. Keable, Machine Gun Corps (Norwich)
Pte. T. Keane, Machine Gun Guards (Lorey)
Pte. J. H. Keddie, Royal Highlanders (South-Woodford)
Pte. J. Keefe, Liverpool Regiment (Buttevant, County Cork)
E. Keen Royal Fusiliers (Swalecliff)
L. Cpl. W. J. Keenan, Worcestershire Regiment (New Bilton)
Pte. E. Kelly, Irish Guards (Newcastle West)
Pte. P. Kelly, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Dublin)
L. Cpl. J. E. Kelsall, Lancashire Fusiliers (Rochdale)
Dvr. J. Kenny, Royal Field Artillery (Bradford)
L. Cpl. C. R. Kent, Scottish Rifles (Castleford)
Spr. H. Kenyon, Royal Engineers (Stockport)
Pte. J. Kerr, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Addiewell)
Pte. W. Keyte, Worcestershire Regiment (Broadway)
Sgt. J. Kilpatrick, Machine Gun Corps (Bellshill)
Sgt. C. W. M. King, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Monmouth)
Sgt. J. King, Hertfordshire Regiment (Royston)
L. Cpl. S. H. King, Durham Light Infantry (Ipswich)
Sgt. W. G. A. King, Middlesex Regiment (Hornsey)
L. Cpl. T. Kingston, Worcestershire Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. J. Kirk, Scottish Rifles (Bonnybridge)
Spr. J. H. Kirkman, Royal Engineers (Chellaston)
Sgt. W. H. Kirley, Worcestershire Regiment (Bristol)
Pte. G. E. Kitchen, York & Lancaster Regiment (Masboro)
Pte. W. Kitchen, South Lancashire Regiment (Ryliops Colliery, County Durham)
Pte. A. P. Knight, RAMC (Warwick)
L. Cpl. J. Knowles, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Sgt. R. Knowles, North Lancashire Regiment (Preston)
Cpl. E. H. Lacey, Somerset Light Infantry (Exmouth)
Pte. P. Lacy, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Balderton)
Pte. F. Lamb, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. S. Lamb, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Mansfield)
Gnr. C. G. Lambert, Royal Field Artillery (Ardrossan)
Pte. J. R. Lambert, Rifle Brigade (Lowestoft)
Act. Sgt. E. Lane, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Leyton, London)
Pte. H. E. Lane, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Chesterfield)
Pte. J. Langfield, Manchester Regiment (Oldham)
Sgt. R. Law, East Lancashire Regiment (Padham)
Pte. F. C. Lawrence, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Battersea, London)
Pte. W. V. Lawrence, East Yorkshire Regiment (Ashford)
Pte. R. Lea, Coldstream Guards (Ormskirk)
Sgt. F. Leach, Lancashire Fusiliers (Rochdale)
Sgt. A. P. Leather, Liverpool Regiment (Evertan)
Cpl. J. Leatherbarrow, Liverpool Regiment (Bootle)
L. Cpl. A. Lee, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
L. Cpl. F. Lee, Bedfordshire Regiment (Wormley)
Sgt. R. Lee, Liverpool Regiment (Ormskirk)
Cpl. H. E. A. Legh, London Regiment (Cosham)
Sgt. S. Leighton, Shropshire Light Infantry (Wellington)
L. Cpl. J. Leroy, Liverpool Regiment (Rarbury, Mass., U.S.A.)
Gnr. A. C. Lewis, Royal Field Artillery (St. George's, London)
Pte. D. T. Lewis, Manchester Regiment (Levenshulme)
Sgt. R. J. Lewis, Shropshire Light Infantry (Whitchuroh)
Pte. W. J. Lewis, Welsh Guards (Milford Haven)
Sgt. J. A. Lingwood, Honourable Artillery Company (Highbury)
Sgt. F. C. Linseay, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Cambridge)
Pte. M. C. Lisney, Scots Guards (Grays)
Pte. A. Little, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Methilhill)
Sgt. G. Little, Gloucestershire Regiment (Cheltenham)
Cpl. W. Littlewood, Durham Light Infantry Hetton-le-Hole)
Cpl. A. Livingstone, RAMC (Dundee)
Sgt. E. Lockey, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Mattock)
Sgt. J. Lomax, RAMC (Eccles)
Pte. T. G. Long, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Darlington)
L. Cpl. E. Longsbottom, East Yorkshire Regiment (Boston, U.S.A.)
Pte. N. Longton, Cheshire Regiment (Whittle-le-Woods)
Pte. D. Looney, Irish Guards (Cork)
Sgt. J. H. Lord, Liverpool Regiment (Birkdale)
Pte. H. Lovett, Machine Gun Corps (Radcliffe)
Pte. R. Lowdon, East Yorkshire Regiment (Waskerley)
Pte. C. W. Lowe, Border Regiment (Platt Bridge)
Pte. W. Lowe, Manchester Regiment (Guilden Sutton)
Pte. W. J. Lowe, Rifle Brigade (Bermondsey)
Cpl. C. Lowin, Machine Gun Corps (Bknkney)
Pte. T. G. Lucas, Welsh Guards (Cardiff)
L. Cpl. P. A. Ludbrook, Royal Engineers (Mexboro)
Pte. W. Lyle, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Glasgow)
Cpl. W. E. Lyon, York & Lancaster Regiment (Collingham)
Private G. H. Lyons, Machine Gun Corps (Sheffield)
Far. Sergeant W. Mackie, Royal Field Artillery (Largs, Ayrshire)
L. Sgt. B. Madden, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. C. Madden, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
L. Cpl. G. T. Maguire, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. J. Maguire, Irish Guards (Blacklion)
Pte. M. Maher, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Stirling)
Pte. J. Major, Devonshire Regiment (Moretonhampstead)
Sgt. H. Maltby, Machine Gun Corps (Breastin)
Pte. A. Mands, Royal Highlanders (Dundee)
Sgt. W. C. Manley, Royal Berkshire Regiment (South Acton, London)
Sgt. A. Mansfield, Middlesex Regiment (E. Hounslow)
Sgt. C. H. Mansfield, Yeomanry (Bakewell)
Pte. J. Mansfield, Yeomanry (Bakewell)
Pte. J. W. Mansfield, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Battersea)
Bombr. J. Marker, Royal Garrison Artillery (Herne Hill)
Pte. W. Marsden, Cheshire Regiment (Stockport)
L. Cpl. H. Marsh, Machine Gun Corps (Edge Hill)
Pte. T. Marshall, Machine Gun Corps (Blackpool)
L. Cpl. J. C. Marston, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Nuneaton)
Pte. A. H. Martin, Somerset Light Infantry (Walthamstow)
Sgt. A. T. Martin, Hampshire Regiment (Portsmouth)
Pte. E. V. Martin, Royal Fusiliers (Faversham)
Pte. D. Martin, Manchester Regiment (Beswick)
Pnr. F. J. Marven, Royal Engineers (West Hampstead)
Pte. W. C. Maskell, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Stockton, near Rugby)
Pte. J. T. Mason, Machine Gun Corps (Birmingham)
Sgt. L. Mason, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Pte. T. Mason, Machine Gun Corps (Kendal)
Dvr. G. T. Masters, Royal Field Artillery (East Ham, London)
L. Cpl. T. Matthews, Royal Fusiliers (Hauwell)
Cpl. T. E. Matthews, Devonshire Regiment (Exmouth)
L. Cpl. G. Mawson, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Lancaster)
Sgt. G. Maxwell, Liverpool Regiment (Glasgow)
Pte. G. May, Royal Fusiliers (Canterbury)
Sgt. J. W. May, Royal Engineers (Ilford)
Pte. J. A. Maycock, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Rugby)
Pte. J. Mayfield, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Sutton-in-Ashfield)
Pte. W. Mayoh, East Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Pte. J. D. McArdle, Lancashire Fusiliers (Rochdale)
Pte. J. McAteer, Irish Guards (Strathbane)
L. Cpl. J. McBrier, Machine Gun Corps (Gartsherrie)
Pte. J. McCabe, Irish Guards (Carrickmacross)
L. Cpl. E. McCann, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Edinburgh)
Sgt. M. J. McCarthy, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Bootle)
Pte. A. McColl, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Borstal)
L. Cpl. C. McCormick, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Cpl. J. McDermott, RAMC (St. Helens)
Cpl. H. McDonald, Scottish Rifles (Glasgow)
Pte. J. McDonald, Scots Guards (Cluny by Tillygowrie)
Pte. A. J. McDougall, Scots Guards (Boston, U.S.A.)
Cpl. G. H. McDowell, Lancashire Fusiliers (Openshaw)
Pte. W. McEwan, Scottish Rifles (Glasgow)
Pte. J. McGillivray, Lancashire Fusiliers (Pendleton)
Pte. W. McGloughlin, Lancashire Fusiliers (Rochdale)
Pte. F. McGowan, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. H. McGowan, Scottish Rifles (Motherwell)
Bombr. J. T. McGraa, Royal Fusiliers (E. Carlisle)
Pte. W. A. McIntosh, Grenadier Guards (Ayr)
Cpl. M. McKiernan, Irish Guards (Clooney Quin)
Spr. D. McKinnon, Royal Engineers (Appin)
Pte. D. McLay, Royal Scots (Lochgelly)
L. Cpl. J. McLean, Royal Engineers (Stretford)
Pte. A. McLelland, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Johnstone)
Pte. D. A. C. McLennan, Royal Highlanders (Kirkcaldy)
L. Cpl. W. McLennan, Manchester Regiment (Moss Side, Manchester)
Pte. B. McLoughlin, East Lancashire Regiment (Accrington)
Pte. J. McMahon, Liverpool Regiment (Seacombe)
L. Cpl. L. McMaster, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Glasgow)
L. Cpl. D. McNab, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Edinburgh)
Sgt. J. W. McNiff, Liverpool Regiment (Bootle)
Sgt. F. C. Meaby, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Cambridge)
Pte. E. Meagher, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. J. G. Meason, Royal Fusiliers (Acton)
Cpl. P. G. Meddoms, Royal Field Artillery (Edgware)
Sgt. A. Medgett, East Kent Regiment (Garden-stone)
Cpl. C. Melia, North Lancashire Regiment (St. Helens)
Pte. A. Mellor, Manchester Regiment (Ardwick)
Pte. T. Mellor, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (E. Derby.)
Gnr. A. L. Melville, Royal Field Artillery (Carmyle)
Sgt. J. Melvin, Royal Field Artillery (Aberdeen)
Cpl. A H. Merry, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Cherry Hinton)
Cpl. A. V. Metcalfe, Royal Field Artillery (Skipton)
L. Cpl. J. Middleton, Lancashire Fusiliers (Ince)
Cpl. W. R. Mildred, Royal Field Artillery (Norwich)
Cpl. F. Miles, Worcestershire Regiment (Bridgnorth)
Pte. W. Miller, Royal Fusiliers (Notting Hill)
Pte. J. Millet, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
L. Cpl. G. Milnes, Lancashire Fusiliers (Manchester)
L. Sgt. J. Miskella, South Lancashire Regiment (Widnes)
Sgt. J. W. Mitchell, Machine Gun Corps (Newbigge-by-Sea)
Pte. G. Moore, Cheshire Regiment (Barnton, near Northwich)
Pte. H. W. Moore, Hampshire Regiment (Sheffield)
Sgt. W. Moore, Manchester Regiment (Ardwick)
Cpl. W. H. Moore, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. W. J. Moore, Hampshire Regiment (Winchester)
Sgt. I. J. H. Morgan, Liverpool Regiment (Farmby)
Pte. M. D. Morgan, York & Lancaster Regiment (Maesteg)
Cpl. N. Morgan, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. W. Morgan, Lancashire Fusiliers (Stoke Newington, London)
Cpl. W. A. Morgan, Royal Field Artillery (Cleethorpes)
Pte. W. R. Morgan, Royal Fusiliers (Blackburn)
L. Cpl. W. Morland, Durham Light Infantry (Sunderland)
Sgt. A. E. Morley, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
L. Cpl. J. Morris, Royal Engineers (Willenhall)
Pte. J. Morris, Lancashire Fusiliers (Liverpool)
Pte. T.Morris, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. A. Morrison, Royal Highlanders (Dundee)
Pte. A. Morrison, RAMC (Aberdeen)
Cpl. G. Mottram, Manchester Regiment (Withington)
Cpl. J. S. Moyens, Coldstream Guards (Bardon Hill)
L. Cpl. A. Mudie, Royal Engineers (Shrewsbury)
Pte. W. E. Muggleton, South Staffordshire Regiment (Leicester)
Pte. W. R. Mullard, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. W. H. Mullett, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Bath)
Pte. E. Mulligan, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Aldershot)
Sgt. S. W. Mullins, Royal Field Artillery (St. Heliers)
Pte. W. J. Munday, Middlesex Regiment (Worthing)
Gnr. J. R. Murdoch, Royal Field Artillery (Gateshead)
Pte. H. Murphey, Cheshire Regiment (Stockport)
L. Sgt. J. Murphy, North Lancashire Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. T. Murray, Royal Highlanders (Anstruther)
Sgt. H. Myers, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Roose)
Pte. W. F. Mitchell, East Lancashire Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. P. J. Mitchelson, RAMC (Glasgow)
Fitter T. C. Mobbs, Royal Field Artillery (Fulham)
Cpl. W. H. Molyneux, Lancashire Fusiliers (Salford)i
Spr. W. Monro, Royal Engineers (Prestonpans)
L. Cpl. R. Montgomerie, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Spr. B. S. Moody, Royal Engineers (Enfield)
Pte. R. Moon, East Lancashire Regiment (Wesham)
Cpl. P. Mooney, Royal Engineers (E. Dublin)
Spr. C. Moore, Royal Engineers (Dalston, London)
Sgt. C. E. Moore, Machine Gun Corps (Rottingr dean)
Sgt. E. Moore, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Stapleford)
Pte. A. Nash, Rifle Brigade (Caterham)
Pte. A. Nash, Royal Fusiliers (S. Tottenham)
Pte. W. J. Nash, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Cpl. J. Naylor, Royal Engineers (St. Helens)
Pte. H. Neail, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Pte. H. Needham, Machine Gun Guards (Darley Abbey)
L. Cpl. A. Negus, Rifle Brigade (Camden Town)
L. Cpl. J. Neil, Scottish Rifles (Glasgow)
Sgt. H. New, Royal Field Artillery (Bournemouth)
Pte. J. A. Newis, Royal Berkshire Regiment (Tunbridge)
Act. Bombr. R. T. Newman, Royal Field Artillery (South Shields)
Pte. M. Newton, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Belper)
L. Cpl. D. G. Nichols, Royal Fusiliers (Sunderland)
Sgt. H. Nichols, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bury)
Pte. W. C. Northey, Durham Light Infantry (Fencehouses)
L. Cpl. J. Nye, Royal Engineers (E. Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Sgt. H. W. Oakes, Grenadier Guards (Hutton, Essex)
Pte. W. O'Brien, Irish Guards (Inniscarra)
L. Cpl. G. O'Connell, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. T. O'Dea, Irish Guards (Kilrush)
2nd Cpl. G. W. Odell, Royal Engineers (Bedford)
L. Cpl. A. Offiler, Lincolnshire Regiment (Grimsby)
Pte. J. O'Hara, Lancashire Fusiliers (Heywood)
Sgt. J. O'Neill, Irish Guards (Cork)
Pte. R. J. Ord, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Durham)
L. Cpl. P. O'Reilly, Manchester Regiment (Gorton)
L. Cpl. L. Orpin, Bedfordshire Regiment (Bromham)
Pnr. F. W. Osborn, Royal Engineers (Chesterton)
Pte. G. Owen, Lancashire Fusiliers (Todmorden)
L. Sgt. G. Packer, Rifle Brigade (Northampton)
Pte. J. Padley, Royal Scots Fusiliers (Ashton-under-Lyne)
Cpl. W. J. Paine, Royal Fusiliers (Staines)
Cpl. F. M. Paish, Wiltshire Regiment (Mildenhall)
Pte. A. S. Palmer, Hampshire Regiment (Bristol)
Pte. F. Palmer, Lancashire Fusiliers (Radcliffe)
Pte. T. Park, North Lancashire Regiment (Preston)
Sgt. A. A. Parker, Hampshire Regiment (Stockbridge)
Pte. F. J. Parker, East Yorkshire Regiment (Calverton)
Sgt. W. J. Parker, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Sgt. S. T. Parkinson, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Manchester)
Pte. T. Parkinson, North Lancashire Regiment (Preston)
Sgt. J. Parmley, Durham Light Infantry (Felling)
Pte. G. R. Parsons, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Skegby)
Pte. W. J. Parsons, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Walworth, London)
Act. Sgt. T. Pattenden, Liverpool Regiment (Hindley)
Sgt. S. B. Patterson, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Walsall)
Pte. J. N. Paul, Scots Guards (Dumgoyne)
Cpl. C. J. Payne, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Manor Park, London)
L. Cpl. D. R. Payne, Worcestershire Regiment (Quidhampton)
Sgt. L. Peake, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Hanley, Staffs.)
Pte. C. W. Pear, York & Lancaster Regiment (Sneinton)
Pte. C. G. Pearce, Scots Guards (Ling field, Surrey)
Pte. G. Pearson, East Surrey Regiment (Walton-on-Thames)
Sgt. J. Pearson, Durham Light Infantry (West Hartlepool)
Gnr. T. Pearson, Royal Field Artillery (Castleford)
Pte. A. Peck, Lincolnshire Regiment (Spalding)
Pte. H. B. Pellett, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Kent)
Pte. T. Pendlebury, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Pte. E. L. Pendrill, Machine Gun Corps (Limehouse)
Cpl. J. Pennington, Lancashire Fusiliers (Manchester)
Sgt. H. Peters, Border Regiment (Maryport)
Cpl. F. Pethybridge, Royal Engineers (Torquay)
Pte. S. G. Phillips, RAMC (Kingswinford)
Pte. J. Picton, Lancashire Fusiliers (Rochdale)
Cpl. H. S. Pilbro, Rifle Brigade (Paddington)
Pte. W. Pinnigar, Machine Gun Corps (Bristol)
Pte. J. Piper, Hampshire Regiment (Faversham)
Gnr. T. H. Poland, Royal Field Artillery (Liverpool)
Pte. J. Pope, Coldstream Guards, attd. Machine Gun Company (Rishton, Lancaster)
Spr. E. Porter, Royal Engineers (Hackney, London)
Spr. V. R. Porter, Royal Engineers (Queens Rd., London)
Pte. E. R. Poston, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Walworth, London)
Sgt. T. Povey, South Lancashire Regiment (St. Helens)
L. Cpl. J. H. Power, Lancashire Fusiliers (Swinton)
L. Cpl. P. Power, Cheshire Regiment (Stockport)
Cpl. F. Pratt, Yeomanry (Derby)
Pte. E. Prendergast, North Staffordshire Regiment (Burslem)
Cpl. J. Prendergast, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Pte. H. S. Preston, RAMC (Burnley)
Pte. R. H. Pretty, Worcestershire Regiment (Redditch)
L. Cpl. C. A. Price, South Wales Borderers (Swansea)
L. Cpl. J. Price, Royal Engineers (Blackley)
Pte. J. Price, Worcestershire Regiment (West Bromwich)
Sgt. W. Price, Cheshire Regiment (Highley, near Bridgnorth)
Pte. E. Pritchard, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Ebbw Vale)
Gnr. T. J. C. Pritty, Royal Field Artillery (Woodbridge)
Pte. A. L. Pudney, Hampshire Regiment (Southend-on-Sea)
Pte. J. Pugh, East Lancashire Regiment (Liverpool)
L. Cpl. A. W. Quarterman, Rifle Brigade (Drumnadrackit)
Cpl. A. Radcliffe, Worcestershire Regiment (Huncoat)
Gnr. V. Radford, Royal Field Artillery (Bradford)
L. Cpl. H. Rainford, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. C. Raley, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Gnr. R. Ramsay, Royal Field Artillery (Dundee)
Pte. F. G. Rand, Worcestershire Regiment (Kelshall)
L. Cpl. L. Randie, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Bedworth)
L. Cpl. V. Randies, Liverpool Regiment (Bootle)
Pte. F. Ranger, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Londonr S.E.)
Pte. E. S. Ranson, Royal Fusiliers (Oxford)
Pte. W. Rayment, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Buntingfbrd)
Cpl. A. Read, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Manchester)
Sgt. P. T. Read, RAMC (Bournemouth)
Cpl. B. Reading, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Southam, near Rugby)
Pte. T. Reddington, Liverpool Regiment (Knock)
Pte. W, A. Reed, Lancashire Fusiliers (Salford)
Pte. J. Rees, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Llanelly)
Sgt. J. E. Rees, Royal Garrison Artillery (Finedon)
Pte. P. I. Rees, RAMC (Garnant)
Cpl. H. Reid, Machine Gun Corps (Barrow)
Pte. W. Reid, Lancashire Fusiliers (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Cpl. A. Rendell, Royal Garrison Artillery (Dorchester)
L. Cpl. J. Reynolds, Grenadier Guards (Liverpool)
Cpl. T. Reynolds, South Lancashire Regiment (Leigh.)
Sgt. W. T. Reynolds, Coldstream Guards (Stafford)
Pte. A. Rhodes, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Eccles)
Pte. J. Rhodes, Manchester Regiment (Ashton-under-Lyne)
Cpl. W. B. Rice, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Grimsby)
Pte. J. Richards, York & Lancaster Regiment (Woolaston)
Pte. W. Richardson, Lancashire Fusiliers (Salford)
Pte. J. Richmond, North Lancashire Regiment (Preston)
Pte. W. J. Ridgewell, Machine Gun Corps (Waldron)
Cpl. C. J. Rigby, Royal Engineers (Chadwell Grays)
Cpl. T. E. Rigby, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. S. W. Riggs, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Mitcham)
Sgt. F. Rising, Royal Garrison Artillery (Malta)
2nd Cpl. A. E. Roadhouse, Royal Engineers (Sheffield)
L. Sgt. J. E. Roake, East Surrey Regiment (Walworth)
Pte. G. Robbins, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Castleford)
Pte. J. Robbins, Essex Regiment (Poulton)
L. Cpl. E. Roberts, Machine Gun Corps (Liverpool)
Sgt. G. Roberts, Royal Fusiliers (Tottenham)
L. Cpl. O. C. Roberts, Manchester Regiment (Cheetham Hall)
Cpl. S. Roberts, Royal Field Artillery (Batley)
Pte. H. Robertson, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Pte. W. Robins, Lancashire Fusiliers (E. Poplar)
Pte. C. Robinson, Lancashire Fusiliers (Pendleton)
Pte. E. G. Robinson, East Lancashire Regiment (Barrow-in-Furness)
Sgt. H. W. Robinson, Royal Fusiliers (Hull)
L. Sgt. J. Robinson, North Lancashire Regiment (Preston)
Sgt. A. G. Robson, Durham Light Infantry (Coldstream, County Durham)
Pte. T. H. Rochelle, Cheshire Regiment (Stockport)
Bombr. A. G. B. Rodger, Royal Field Artillery (Musselburgh)
Cpl. J. Rogers, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Drogheda)
Pte. W. Roocroft, North Lancashire Regiment (Coppull, near Chorley)
2nd Class A. Mechanic J. W. Rookledge, Royal Flying Corps (Cape Town, South Africa)
Sgt. F. Roscatier, South Lancashire Regiment (Widnes)
Cpl. A. Routledge, Border Regiment (Patterdale)
Sgt. B. Rough, Machine Gun Corps (Edinburgh)
Pte. G. Rowbotham, Cheshire Regiment (Stockport)
Pte. M. Rowe, Irish Guards (Coole)
Pte. B. Rowell, Lancashire Fusiliers (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Pte. W. Rowley, Grenadier Guards (Bacup, Lancaster)
Pte. J. Ryder, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
Pte. E. Rylands, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Sgt. B. Sadler, Royal Garrison Artillery (Yarmouth)
Cpl. A. Salmon, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. B. Sandham, Cheshire Regiment (Whitestakes, near Preston)
L. Cpl. P. Sandiford, East Lancashire Regiment (Shaw)
Pte. C. Sanson, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Hackney)
L. Cpl. J. Santos, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Act. Bombr. F. Saunders, Royal Garrison Artillery (St. Helens)
L. Cpl. H. C. Saunders, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Cambridge)
Pte. J. Saunders, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Dublin)
Pte. C. Schofield, Scots Guards (Bradford)
Pte. G. Scott, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Somerset)
Cpl. J. Scott, Royal Irish Fusiliers (Dublin)
Sgt. C. G. Scrace, Royal Fusiliers (Penshurst)
Pte. E. L. Scrase, Royal Munster Fusiliers (Burgess Hill)
Pte. A. Scuffle, Hampshire Regiment (Blackwater)
Pte. T. J. Seale, Royal Fusiliers (Brixton)
Sgt. B. Seddon, Liverpool Regiment (fLitherland)
L. Sgt. F. Seddon, Liverpool Regiment (Southport)
Pte. G. Seddon, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Oldham)
Pte. J. Sellers, East Yorkshire Regiment (Hull)
Pte. E. Sergeant, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Birmingham)
2nd Cpl. A. E. Setterfield, Royal Engineers (Lower Tooting, London)
Pte. J. Sewell, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Camberwell)
Pte. F. N. Shaler, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Hasbury, near Leamington Spa)
Sgt. P. Shannon, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. P. Sharkey, Irish Guards (Sion Mills)
Cpl. W. J. Sharp, Lancashire Fusiliers (Kirkby Lonsdale)
Sgt. H. Sharpe, Border Regiment (Kendal)
Pte. J. W. Sharpe, Lincolnshire Regiment (Grantham)
L. Cpl. A. Shaw, Royal Scots (Jura)
L. Cpl. A. F. Sheehan, Rifle Brigade (Hoxton, London)
Spr. J. Sheehan, Royal Engineers (Marylebone)
Cpl. D. Shenton, Manchester Regiment (Greenheys)
L. Cpl. T. Sherlock, RAMC (Blackpool)
Sgt. A. G. Shrubb, RAMC (Ipswich)
Pte. S. Shufflebottom, East Lancashire Regiment (Manchester)
L. Cpl. T. Shuker, North Staffordshire Regiment (Stoke-on-Trent)
Pte. S. Shuttleworth, East Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Pte. J. Sickel, Machine Gun Corps (Kensington)
Sgt. J. Sillence, Hampshire Regiment (Southampton)
Cpl. G. Sim, RAMC (Bridge of Allan)
Sgt. W. Sim, Royal Engineers (Aberdeen)
Pte. J. Simmonds, E. Brigade (London)
Pte. F. Simmons, Army Service Corps (HaverstockHill)
Pte. C. Simins, Royal Fusiliers (Oxford)
Sgt. W. Simpson, Coldstream Guards (Sturton-by-Stow, Lincoln)
Pte. T. Aingleton, RAMC (Carlisle)
Sgt. B. Slack, Royal Field Artillery (Jarrow)
Gnr. B. A. Daughter, Royal Garrison Artillery (Bickmansworth)
L. Cpl. E. J. Smalley, Liverpool Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Company (Cheetham)
Pte. F. Smellie, East Lancashire Regiment (Padiham)
Pte. J. Smillie, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Fauldhouse)
Pte. A. Smith, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Coventry)
Pte. A. B. Smith, Manchester Regiment (Colwyn Bay)
Mechanic Staff Sergeant A. E. Smith, Royal Engineers (Buckland)
Pte. B. A. Smith, Bedfordshire Regiment (Thorpe-le-Soken)
Pte. H. Smith, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Jersey)
L. Cpl. I. V. Smith, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. J. C. Smith, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Blackridge)
Pte. M. W. Smith, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Hertford)
Pte. B. Smith, Liverpool Regiment (Manchester)
Dvr. B. Smith, Royal Field Artillery (Bury St. Edmunds)
Pte. B. H. Smith, Hampshire Regiment (West Ashling, near Chichester)
L. Cpl. S. W. Smith, King's Royal Rifle Corps (West Hendon)
Pte. T. Smith, Rifle Brigade (Norwich)
L. Sgt. W. (Smith, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Durham)
L. Cpl. W. Smith, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Whittlesey)
Pte. W. H. Smith, Machine Gun Corps (Stoke-on-Trent)
Sgt. W. T. Smith, Lancashire Fusiliers (Liverpool)
L. Cpl. A. J. South, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Carlton)
Sgt. W. Sowerby, Border Regiment (Bishop Auckland)
Pte. J. Spalding, Royal Highlanders (Forfar)
Pte. B. Spanton, Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (Walthamstow)
Cpl. F. J. Sparks, Machine Gun Corps (E. Nuneaton)
Pte. J. Sparrow, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Christchurch)
Gnr. H. T. Spence, Royal Garrison Artillery (Otley)
Pte. J. Spoors, Durham Light Infantry (Felling)
Gnr. A. F. Staite, Royal Field Artillery (Edgware Road, London)
Sgt. J. Stapleton, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Cpl. J. Stark, Labour Corps (Pauperhaugh)
Pte. J. Stephen, RAMC (Mill of Auchintoul)
Pte. J. Steward, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Ipswich)
Sgt. A. Stewart, Machine Gun Corps (Arbroath)
Pte. H. Stewart, Royal Scots (Kirriemuir)
Cpl. J. Stewart, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Fife)
C.Q.M.S. P. J. Stillwell, York & Lancaster Regiment (Nottingham)
Dvr. V. J. Stockley, attd. Royal Field Artillery (Parkstone)
Pte. P. C. Stokes, Royal Fusiliers (Enfield)
L. Cpl. J. Stone, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (Marlow)
Sgt. J. Stott, Royal Engineers (Hartlepool)
Cpl. A. Stout, Lancashire Fusiliers (Tyldesley)
Gnr. A. Strachan, Royal Garrison Artillery (Forfar)
L. Sgt. M. W. Stubbings, Hertfordshire Regiment (Bishops Stortford)
Pte. F. E. Stubbs, Middlesex Regiment (Leyton)
Pte. W. G. Stuart, Royal Highlanders (Partick)
Pte. E. B. Stuckey, RAMC (Cardiff)
Pte. S. W. Stuckey, RAMC (Cardiff)
Pte. F. Styles, Rifle Brigade (Kensington)
Pte. E. T. Such, Royal Berkshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Cpl. T. A. Sullivan, Royal Field Artillery (Bow)
Sgt. H. Summersgill, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bury)
Cpl. W. Sutcliffe, Scots Guards (Stanley)
Pte. S. Sutton, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Atherstone)
L. Cpl. A. Swain, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Paddington)
Pte. J. Swallow, Lancashire Fusiliers (Accrington)
Dvr. H. V. Swan, Army Service Corps (Maidstone)
Pte. D. Sweeney, Irish Guards (Macroom)
Cpl. G. Swift, South Staffordshire Regiment (St. Helens, Lancaster)
Pte. J. W. Sykes, Manchester Regiment (Newton Heath)
Pte. T. Syme, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Stewarton)
Pte. G. Tait, Border Regiment (Felling-on-Tyne)
Pte. F. T. Talbot, Royal Fusiliers (Chiswick)
Gnr. G. E. Tarling, Royal Field Artillery (Mangotsfield)
Pte. A. B.Tate, Royal Fusiliers (Prittlewell)
Pte. E. Taylor, Machine Gun Corps (Chorley)
L. Sgt. E. E. Taylor, Grenadier Guards (Cirencester)
L. Cpl. G. A. Taylor, Worcestershire Regiment (Grimsby)
Pte. H. Taylor, Lancashire Fusiliers (Badcliffe)
Pte. J. Taylor, East Yorkshire Regiment (Hull)
Gnr. J. Taylor, Royal Field Artillery (Manchester)
Pte. T. Taylor, Machine Gun Corps (Spilsby)
Dvr. W. Taylor, Royal Field Artillery (Walsall)
Pte. W. Taylor, Machine Gun Corps (Congleton)
Sgt. W. F. Taylor, Royal Berkshire Regiment (Bromley-by-Bow)
Sgt. B. Teer, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Sgt. M. Tempest, Border Regiment (Hetton-le-Hole)
Pte. A. Terry, Liverpool Regiment (Bolton)
Pte. T. J. Thistleton, North Lancashire Regiment (Longridge, near Preston)
Cpl. J. Thompson, North Lancashire Regiment (Chorley)
Dvr. A. Thomas, Royal Field Artillery (Kentish Town, London)
Pte. J. Thomas, Lancashire Fusiliers (Salford)
Cpl. J. W. Thomas, Lancashire Fusiliers (Abercarn)
Sgt. A. Thompson, York & Lancaster Regiment (Co Chester)
Pte. G. Thompson, East Kent Regiment (Earlsfield)
Pte. H. Thompson, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. H. G. Thompson, Rifle Brigade (East Greenwich)
L. Cpl. I. L. Thompson, South Staffordshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Sgt. S. Thompson, Royal Field Artillery (Greenock)
Pte. B. Thornley, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Buxton)
Pte. W. Thornley, Manchester Regiment (Oldham)
L. Cpl. H. Threlfall, Coldstream Guards (Bolton)
L. Cpl. E. N. Thwaites, Royal Fusiliers (Southall)
Sgt. J. Tickle, RAMC (Formby)
Pte. C. Tilborn, Rifle Brigade (Peckham)
Pte. J. Tindell, Rifle Brigade, attd. Machine Gun Company (East Dulwich)
L. Sgt. S. W. Tomlin, Rifle Brigade (Holloway, London)
Pte. J. Tomlinson, Machine Gun Corps (Castletor)
Pte. J. W. Tomlinson, Coldstream Guards (Lincoln)
Cpl. E. Tompkins, Hertfordshire Regiment (Hemel Hempstead)
Pte. F. Toole, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bury)
Pte. C. O. H. Todd, Manchester Regiment (Newcastle)
L. Cpl. J. T. Topping, Lancashire Fusiliers (Middleton)
Sgt. F. Townrow, Lincolnshire Regiment (Shirebrook)
Sgt. L. Townsend, Royal Field Artillery (Liverpool)
Pte. E. Travis, London Regiment (Stockwell)
L. Cpl. H. Trevor, Lancashire Fusiliers (Seedley)
Pte. P. Tuffy, Irish Guards (Castlebar)
Cpl. G. Turnbull, Machine Gun Corps (Northumberland)
Cpl. R. Turnbull, Royal Engineers (E. Greenock)
Pte. A. Turner, RAMC (Bristol)
Pnr. E. Turner, Royal Engineers (Westwood)
Pte. A. G. Turner, Lincolnshire Regiment (Hartlepool)
Pte. F. C. Turner, Hampshire Regiment (Odiham)
Sgt. J. Turner, Highland Light Infantry (Newmains)
Cpl. J. F. Turner, Royal Sussex Regiment (Woking)
Pte. M. Turner, Lancashire Fusiliers (Swalwell)
Pte. H. R. Twiss, Manchester Regiment (Sandbach)
Sgt. L. Tyler, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Birmingham)
Pte. R. Tyrer, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Cpl. W. F. Ungless, Machine Gun Corps (Ipswich)
Pte. P. Uphill, Lancashire Fusiliers (Balham)
Pte. W. G. Uren, Welsh Regiment (Port Talbot)
Sgt. G. Veitch, Machine Gun Corps (Edinburgh)
Pte. J. B. Venables, Lancashire Fusiliers (Peckham)
L. Cpl. J. Veney, Liverpool Regiment (Bootle)
Pte. S. E. Venn, Grenadier Guards (E. Boston, Lincolnshire)
Sgt. E. Verdin, Royal Scots (E. London)
Cpl. H. Vickers, Manchester Regiment (Chorlton-cum-Hardy)
Pte. T. Virgo, Lancashire Fusiliers (Atherton)
Pte. J. J. Waite, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Coventry)
L. Cpl. C. E. Waldron, Worcestershire Regiment (Wildmoor)
Sgt. A. F. A. Walker, Machine Gun Corps (Herne Hill)
Sgt. B. Walker, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Matlock)
Pte. C. E. Walker, Worcestershire Regiment (Rochdale)
Cpl. H. Walker, Somerset Light Infantry (Derby)
Pte. J. Walker, Worcestershire Regiment (Hindley)
Sgt. R. Walker, Scottish Rifles (Cowdenbeath)
Gnr. J. R. Wallace, Royal Field Artillery (Armadale)
Pte. J. R. Wallace, Welsh Guards (Blaenmondda, Glamorgan)
Pte. W. Wallace, Scots Guards (Glasgow)
Pte. H. Walmsley, Liverpool Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Company (Southport)
Cpl. D. Walsh, Liverpool Regiment (Southport)
Pte. P. Walsh, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Bradford)
Sgt. B. Walton, Royal Engineers (Todmorden)
Pte. H. Walwyn, Manchester Regiment (Ystalyfera)
Pte. F. Warburton, Yorkshire Light Infantry (Sheffield)
Gnr. H. Warren, Royal Field Artillery (Hans Place, London)
L. Cpl. T. Warren, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Leigh)
Pte. G. Warrington, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Ashbourne)
Sgt. A. H. Waters, Machine Gun Corps (Southport)
Pte. R. Watkinson, Liverpool Regiment (Southport)
L. Cpl. S. C. Watler, Rifle Brigade (Harpenden)
L. Cpl. C. Watson, Hertfordshire Regiment (Northampton)
Cpl. C. F. Watson, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Cambridge)
Dvr. F. Watson, Royal Field Artillery (Burton-on-Trent)
L. Cpl. G. Watson, Royal Highlanders (Arbroath)
Sgt. J. Watson, Durham Light Infantry (Annfield Plain)
Sgt. J. Watson, Lincolnshire Regiment (Sheffield)
Act. Sgt. M. Watson, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. R. H. Watson, RAMC (Cambridge)
Petty Officer T. Watson, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Smalwell)
Pte. M. Watt, King's Own Scottish Borderers (Dumfries)
Sgt. W. Way, Devonshire Regiment (Tiverton)
Pte. G. A. Webb, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Spr. P. Webb, Royal Engineers (Cambridge)
Pte. H. Webster, Scots Guards (Methley, near Leeds)
Pte. W. Welsby, East Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Pte. C. Went, Scots Guards (Hereford)
Cpl. A. Werrill, Royal Field Artillery (Wigan)
Sgt. A. West, Royal Field Artillery (Bath)
Pte. F. Wheeldin, North Lancashire Regiment (Hindley)
Spr. A. E. G. Wheeler, Royal Engineers (Quidhampton)
Sgt. W. C. Wheller, Royal Engineers (Manorbier, Pern.)
Bombr. E. Whitaker, Royal Field Artillery (Thornhill)
Pte. G. H. White, Royal Highlanders (Maybole, Ayrshire)
Pte. L. White, Manchester Regiment (Manchester)
L. Cpl. E. Whitmarsh, Middlesex Regiment (Tottenham)
Sgt. W. T. Whiteside, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Ulverston)
L. Cpl. C. Whittaker, Manchester Regiment (Blackley)
Pte. W. Whittaker, Manchester Regiment (Oldham)
L. Cpl. J. T. Wickens, Military Foot Police (West Norwood)
L. Cpl. G. Widdows, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. A. Wiggett, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Hucknall)
L. Cpl. J. Wilcox, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Cpl. F. Wild, Coldstream Guards (Hoibeck, Leeds)
Pte. J. T. Wild, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Oldham)
Pte. A. J. Williams, Rifle Brigade (Peckham)
Pte. G. Williams, Liverpool Regiment (Southport)
Sgt. H. S. Williams, Grenadier Guards (Camberwell, S.B.)
Act. Sgt. J. Williams, South Lancashire Regiment (Widnes)
Cpl. J. Williams, Welsh Regiment (Llandderfel, Bala)
Pte. W. R. Williams, Army Service Corps (Birkenhead)
Pte. P. Willows, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Cambridge)
Pte. J. Wilmot, Rifle Brigade (Holloway)
Pte. E. C. C. Wilson, Liverpool Regiment (Lowestoft)
Sgt. G. Wilson, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. J. Wilson, Machine Gun Corps (Edinburgh)
Cpl. W. Wilson, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Spr. H. Wimpory, Royal Engineers (Islington)
Pte. R. Wing, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Coates, Whittlesey)
Dvr. J. Winson, Royal Field Artillery (Kirk Ireton)
Gnr. A. Wood, Tank Corps (Berkhamstead)
L. Cpl. H. Wood, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Enfield)
Sgt. R. M. Wood, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Witton, Birmingham)
Sgt. T. McD. Wood, Scots Guards (Greenock)
Pte. F. Woodhead, Cheshire Regiment (Glossop)
Cpl. G. Woodhouse, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment Heanor)
Pte. J. T. Woodruff, Durham Light Infantry (Ferryhill)
Pte. J. Woodward, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment, attd. Machine Gun Company (Sandiacre)
Pte. S. Woodward, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Sgt. W. Worker, South Staffordshire Regiment (Walsall)
Pte. J. T. Worsley, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bury)
L. Cpl. J. Wright, Liverpool Regiment (Southport)
Sgt. J. H. D. Wright, Derby Yeomanry (Ashbourne)
L. Sgt. T. Wright, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Preston)
Sgt. V. C. Wright, Lancashire Fusiliers (Bury)
L. Cpl. W. Wright, Bedfordshire Regiment (Horncastle)
Spr. W. Wright, Royal Engineers (Elton, near Stockton)
Pte. A. J. Wyatt, Coldstream Guards (Sharpies, near Bolton)
Pte. P. Wyre, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Sgt. J. Yates, Liverpool Regiment (Farmby)
Pte. S. Yates, Lancashire Fusiliers (St. Helens)
Pte. W. Yates, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Wieran)
Pte. W. Yates, North Lancashire Regiment (Leyland)
Pte. J. W. Young, Machine Gun Corps (Romford)
Sgt. R. Younge, Leinster Regiment (Rosenallis)
For coolness and gallantry displayed in the performance of their duties when a casualty clearing station was heavily shelled 
Sister Mary Gladys Connie Foley RRC Queen Alexandra's Imperial Military Nursing Service
Sister Mabel Jennings ARRC Territorial Force Nursing Service
Australian Imperial Force
Sgt. A. T. S. Adams, Light Horse Regiment
Spr. W. J. F. Adams, Engineers
Sgt. D. H. Allan, Infantry
Pte. E. E. Anderson, Infantry
Tmp Sergeant S. Anderson, Infantry
Pte. T. Anderson, Infantry
Dvr. L. C. Annear, Field Artillery
Pte. V. M. Arandale, Infantry
L. Cpl. C. P. Archer, Infantry
Pte. F. B. Archer, Infantry
Pte. H. M. Armstrong, Infantry
Dvr. W. J. C. Arnott, Field Artillery
Sgt. T. J. Ashley, Army Service Corps
Pte. E. D. Ashton, Infantry
Sgt. E. B. Astbury, Pioneer Battalion
Pte. G. Aston, Infantry
Dvr. A.E. Attrill, Army Service Corps
M.T. Driver B. O. Austin, Army Service Corps
Pte. P. C. Avery, Infantry
Cpl. A. E. Ayers, Infantry
Sgt. F. J. Bailey, Pioneer Battalion
Cpl. W. Bailey, Field Artillery
Gnr. C. A. Baker, Field Artillery
Cpl. C. T. Baldock, Trench Mortar Battery
Gnr. C. Baldwin, Field Artillery
Gnr. N. Bannon, Field Artillery
Gnr. F. T. Barker, Field Artillery
Gnr. S. B. Barker, Field Artillery
L. Cpl. A. E. Barnes, Infantry
Gnr. F. S. Barton, Field Artillery
Pte. L. V. Barwick, Infantry
Sgt. E. S. Beard, Infantry
Cpl. J. P. Beaver, A.S.C
Dvr. W. H. Beever, Field Artillery
M.T. Driver H. J. Beith, Army Service Corps
Sgt. C. W. Beli, Infantry
Cpl. I. L. Bell, Infantry
Sgt. T. I. Birch, Infantry
L. Cpl. E. R. Blackadder, Infantry
Pte. W. Blezard, Infantry
Pte. C. J. Bond, Army Medical Corps
Pte. E. W. Bourke, Infantry
Sgt. H. E. Bradbury, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. J. T. Bradley, Army Medical Corps
Onr. H. C. Brisbane, Field Artillery
Act. Sgt. V. J. Brogan, Field Artillery
2nd Cpl. J. P. Brown, Engineers
Pte. J. W. Brown, Infantry
Cpl. P. Brown, Infantry
Dvr. J. Brownlees, Field Artillery
Dvr. E. J. Bruce, Field Artillery
Pte. C. H. Buchanan, Machine Gun Corps
Sgt. R. Buchanan, Field Artillery
Cpl. A. H. Buckley, Army Service Corps
Pte. A. W. Burgoyne, Infantry
Sgt. J. Burke, Infantry
Pte. W. E. Burke, Infantry
Cpl. W. J. Burkett-Vipont, Light Horse Regiment
Tpr. J. F. Burley, Light Horse Regiment
Cpl. F. D. Burrell, Engineers
Cpl. A. A. Butcher, Army Service Corps
L. Sgt. P. C. Callahan, Infantry
Sgt. G. N. Cameron, Pioneer Battalion
Pte. J. J. Cameron, Infantry
Pte. M. B. Cameron, Infantry
Tmp Cpl. G. Campbell, Infantry
Cpl. L. R. Carr, Pioneer Battalion
Sgt. M. Carr, Light Horse Regiment
L. Cpl. W. H. Carr, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. F. B. Carrodus, Pioneer Battalion
Pte. W. J. Carroll, Army Medical Corps
Gnr. J. H. Carthew, Field Artillery
Dvr. G. J. Cavanagh, Field Artillery
Tmp Cpl. M. W. Cawston, Pioneer Battalion
Sgt. E. C. Cay, Australian Engineers
Sgt. G. A. Charlesworth, Infantry
Sgt. T. Charlton, Pioneer Battalion
Act. 2nd Cpl. C. Cheetham, Engineers
Sgt. E. C. Chenney, Field Artillery
Cpl. V. Chilcott, Light Horse Regiment
Gnr. H. Chippindall, Field Artillery
Cpl. A. W. Cima, Infantry
Staff Sergeant B. J. Clark, Army Medical Corps
Gnr. V. K. Clark, Field Artillery
Cpl. J. H. Clarke, Infantry
Pte. T. C. Cleary, Infantry
Far. Sergeant A. C. Cocks, Field Artillery
Sgt. W. Coleman, Infantry
Pte. S. Collins, Pioneer Battalion
Tpr. A. E. Cook, Light Horse Regiment
Dvr. O. E. Cook, Army Medical Corps
Pte. P. G. Coppock, Infantry
Pte. G. H. Cornwell, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. L. C. Cotterill, Infantry
Dvr. H. A. Goveny, Field Artillery
Pte. G. H. Craven, Infantry
Pte. P. J. Critchley, Infantry
Tpr. S. J. Cross, Light Horse Regiment
Far. Cpl. P. W. Cunynghame, Army Service Corps
Cpl. O. Daley, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. T. Dalgleish, Field Artillery
Pte. J. R. Dalton, Pioneer Battalion
Sgt. G. E. T. Darbyshire, Engineers
Dvr. F. H. Davis, Field Artillery
Pte. G. Dawson, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. R. E. G. Denham, Infantry
Gnr. W. Densley, Field Artillery
Sgt. J. Devine, Pioneer Battalion
Sgt. T. W. Dial, Infantry
Dvr. J. Diggles, Field Artillery
Pte. J. J. Dobbins, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. W. Donnelly, Infantry
Tpr. V. Donovan, Light Horse Regiment
Pte. A. J. Dougherty, Infantry
Pte. D. Dowd, Infantry
Sgt. J. W. Dowley, Light Horse Regiment
Tpr. E. Dowling, Light Horse Regiment
Pte. J. P. Drake, Army Medical Corps
Tpr. C. E. M. Duff, Light Horse Regiment
Sgt. G. A. Easey, Infantry
Gnr. S. Ebsary, Field Artillery
Pte. L. Edwards, Army Medical Corps
Cpl. H. Ellioott, Infantry
Pte. C. F. Ellingsen, Army Medical Corps
Act. Cpl. F. Elworthy, Field Artillery
Dvr. E. L. Evans, Machine Gun Corps
Sgt. J. A. Evans, Infantry
Sgt. W. F. Evans, Infantry
Dvr. R. F. Fairclough, Field Artillery
Sgt. G. Fawcett, Field Artillery
Pte. F. Feder, Infantry
L. Cpl. D. Fenner, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. H. G. Ferranti, Army Service Corps
Dvr. Royal Artillery Fisher, Field Artillery
L. Cpl. J. A. Fly, Infantry
Pte. S. J. Folkes, Infantry
Dvr. A. Ford, Field Artillery
Dvr. E. E. Fowle, Field Artillery
Tmp Cpl. D. C. Frankcombe, Infantry
Pte. F. Franklin, Infantry
Sgt. H. J. Fraser, Infantry
Gnr. J. J. Fraser, Trench Mortar Battery
Sgt. H. J. Frazer, Infantry
Pte. J. I. Freeman, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. W. V. French, Army Service Corps
Gnr. C. E. Freshney, Field Artillery
Dvr. A. H. Furnies, Engineers
Bombr. W. V. Gayer, Field Artillery
Cpl. G. J. Gillam, Garrison Artillery
Cpl. W. M. Glenister, Field Artillery
Sgt. W. H. Glossop, Infantry
Pte. F. Godden, Infantry
Sgt. R. J. Goodliffe, Field Artillery
Dvr. H. E. St. J. Gough, Army Medical Corps
Tpr. T. Graham, Light Horse Regiment
L. Cpl. A. H. Gray, Infantry
Sgt. V. A. Goodwin, Field Artillery
Pte. A. R. Green, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. J. A. Greenbank, Army Service Corps
Sgt. R. C. Gregory, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. R. W. Grey, Army Medical Corps
Spr. R. Grieve, Engineers
Cpl. C. F. Grimble, Infantry
Tpr. W. E. Grimshaw, Machine Gun Corps
Spr. J. Grinham, Engineers
Pte. D. Gunn, Infantry
Spr. W. A. Haden, Engineers
Pte. W. Hall, Infantry
Cpl. W. J. Halliday, Infantry
L. Cpl. P. E. Hambly, Infantry
Sgt. R. Hamilton, Light Horse Regiment
Dvr. H. W. Hammond, Army Service Corps
Pte. H. A. Hampson, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. H. Hannaford, Pioneer Battalion
L. Cpl. M. Harrison, Infantry
Pte. G. G. Hart, Infantry
Pte. M. J. Harvey, Infantry
Dvr. C. E. Hawkins, Field Artillery
L. Cpl. H. W. Hawkins, Army Medical Corps
Cpl. H. R. Haxby, Infantry
Dvr. C. R. Hayek, Engineers
Cpl. E. Hayes, Army Medical Corps
Gnr. E. J. Hayward, Field Artillery
Tpr. A. E. Healey, Light Horse Regiment
Pte. F. Healey, Infantry
Pte. H. F. Heinrich, Infantry
Pte. W. A. Heintz, Infantry
Pte. S. Hendry, Infantry
Sgt. A. D. Herd, Infantry
Pte. C. N. Hethorn, Pioneer Battalion
Gnr. H. Hickson, Trench Mortar Battery
Sgt. H. T. Hilder, Infantry
Spr. G. R. Hill, Engineers
Pte. W. J. Hodge, Infantry
Tpr. T. R. Hogarth, Light Horse Regiment
L. Cpl. W. Holden, Infantry
Dvr. T. W. Holland, Field Artillery
Pte. A. Hollingworth, Infantry
Dvr. T. Hollingworth, Field Artillery
Spr. S. H. E. Hollow, Engineers
Sgt. H. B. Holloway, Infantry
Dvr. E. H. Holmes, Field Artillery
Gnr. G. Holmes, Field Artillery
Pte. J. Holt, Infantry
Sgt. S. Hope, Infantry
Sgt. H. Hopper, Engineers
Pte. M. J. A. Houston, Infantry
Sgt. C. B. Hughes, Infantry
Sgt. W. J. Hume, Infantry
Gnr. T. S. W. Hurley, Field Artillery
Tpr. E. Hyland, Light Horse Regiment
Pte. R. A. Irwin, Infantry
Sgt. W. Jackson, Infantry
Dvr. W. Jackson, Field Artillery
Pte. C. James, Infantry
Pte. C. G. James, Infantry
Sgt. R. S. James, Light Horse Regiment
Pte. S. James, Infantry
Pte. H. L. Jenkins, Infantry
Sgt. L. Johns, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. H. Jones, Field Artillery
Dvr. W. Jones, Field Artillery
Dvr. H. Kane, Infantry
L. Cpl. A. G. Keane, Machine Gun Corps
Tpr. C. E. Kelleher, Light Horse Regiment
L. Cpl. J. J. Kelly, Light Horse Regiment
Pte. W. Kelty, Infantry
Pte. A. Kemp, Infantry
Pte. H. C. Kershaw, Army Medical Corps
L. Sgt. H. G. Kershaw, Machine Gun Corps
Sgt. E. S. Key, Infantry
Gnr. G. Kibblewhite, Field Artillery
Cpl. J. S. Kidd, Engineers
L. Cpl. H. Killalea, Light Horse Regiment
Pte. J. A. W. Killen, Infantry
Dvr. J. E. Kilpatrick, Army Service Corps
Pte. J. King, Infantry
Sgt. J. H. S. King, Infantry
Pte. L. W. King, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. B. C. King, Field Artillery
Cpl. J. F. Kittson, Infantry
Pte. M. I. Knudsen, Infantry
L. Cpl. H. G. Lamb, Infantry
L. Cpl. K. D. Lane, Army Medical Corps
Pte. W. Langdon, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. R. Lawless, Infantry
Pte. E. C. Lawrance, Infantry
Dvr. S. J. Leonard, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. A. Leslie, Field Artillery
Bombr. O. H. Lightbody, Field Artillery
Pte. A Little, Salvage Corps
L. Cpl. G. W. Lloyd, Army Medical Corps
Pte. W. J. Lobsey, Infantry
L. Cpl. R. Loder, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. A. H. Longworth, Army Medical Corps
Pte. L. C. Ludbrooke, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. A. C. Macadam, Army Service Corps
Act. Cpl. J. J. Mace, Engineers
Dvr. G. R. Malinson, Field Artillery
Cpl. T. T. Manning, Army Service Corps
Pte. G. A. Manton, Infantry
Pte. T. E. Mappin, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. H. W. Marshall, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. G. H. Martin, Infantry
Pte. J. Matheson, Infantry
Spr. W. J. Mawby, Engineers
Pte. F. P. May, Army Medical Corps
L. Sgt. R. C. May, Infantry
Dvr. J. McCarthy, Army Medical Corps
Pte. C. V. McDonald, Pioneer Battalion
Tmp 2nd Cpl. E. M. McDonald, Engineers
Tmp Cpl. F. McDonald, Infantry
Sgt. J. McDonald, Infantry
Pte. W. McDonald, Infantry
Cpl. W. J. McDonald, Engineers
Sgt. S. McGarth, Infantry
Sgt. M. McGrath, Infantry
Dvr. G. G. McKay, Field Artillery
Gnr. M. McKenzie, Field Artillery
Cpl. T. B. McKeone, Engineers
Gnr. L. McKinney, Field Artillery
Pte. O. W. McKinnon, Infantry
Spr. S. H. McNamara, Engineers
Gnr. A. L. McPherson, Field Artillery
Pte. A. McWatters, Infantry
Bombr. C. H. Meek, Field Artillery
Bombr. A. Mehan, Field Artillery
Pte. E. J. Mellish, Infantry
Cpl. J. V. Meredith, Infantry
Sgt. B. F. Mitchell, Pioneer Battalion
Pte. W. J. Moore, Army Medical Corps
Pte. C. Moran, Infantry
Dvr. A. Morrow, Field Artillery
L. Cpl. F. R. Morrow, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. C. Mortimer, Infantry
Dvr. F. B. Mountoastle, Field Artillery
Pte. J. A. Murray, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. H. Nancarrow, Engineers
Gnr. C. W. Nevill, Field Artillery
Pte. W. J. L. Newell, Infantry
Pte. C. H. Newey, Infantry
Dvr. C. L. Newitt, Field Artillery
Pte. G. H. Newman, Infantry
Sgt. H. Norman, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. R. M. Norman, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. O'Brien, Infantry
Dvr. J. O'Connor, Army Service Corps
Tpr. J. W. Offord, Light Horse Regiment
Pte. W. O'Hearn, Infantry
Tpr. T. O'Leary, Light Horse Regiment
Cpl. A. A. Olin, Infantry
Cpl. G. B. Oliver, Field Artillery
Pte. C. H. Oram, Infantry
L. Cpl. R. V. I. Ormsby, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. A. Page, Field Artillery
Spr. P. P. Page, Engrs
Cpl. E. A. Pagels, Infantry
Pte. H. L. Parman, Infantry
L. Cpl. A. E. Parrish, Infantry
Cpl. K. G. Patterson, Infantry
Pte. K. F. Paulin, Infantry
Pte. G. Peacock, Infantry
Pte. J. Pebblewick, Infantry
Pte. J. Peel, Infantry
L. Cpl. R. Perkins, Infantry
Cpl. V. Peterson, Engineers
Cpl. F. J. S. Pettersson, Engineers
Pte. F. J. Philip, Infantry
Sgt. C. H. Phillips, Infantry
Cpl. E. B. Picton, Light Horse Regiment
Pte. H. V. Pike, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. T. Pinchen, Infantry
Pte. J. R. Pollock, Infantry
Dvr. F. E. Pope, Field Artillery
Dvr. J. G. Pope, Infantry
L. Cpl. T. A. Potter, Infantry
Sgt. W. R. Powell, Infantry
Dvr. R. G. Preece, Engineers
Pte. J. P. Prendergast, Infantry
Pte. A. Prescott, Infantry
L. Cpl. T. J. Price, Army Medical Corps
Cpl. W. G. F. Pritchard, Machine Gun Corps
L. Cpl. A. E. Puyett, Infantry
Gnr. H. C. Quinsey, Field Artillery
Dvr. C. R. Radnell, Field Artillery
L. Cpl. A. Raff, Infantry
Pte. D. E. Rees, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. H. G. Richmond, Infantry
Dvr. W. A. Rigney, Field Artillery
Sgt. R. H. Ringrose, Pioneer Battalion
Pte. J. Ritchie, Army Medical Corps
Pte. J. B. Roach, Infantry
Pte. J. T. Roberta, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. J. V. A. Robertson, Field Artillery
Dvr. C.F. Robinson, Field Artillery
Pte. J. Robinson, Infantry
Act. Sgt. R. R. Robinson, Pioneer Battalion
Pte. W. B. M. Robinson, Infantry
Pte. L. Rogers, Infantry
Pte. E. V. Rosenberg, Infantry
Sgt. C. W. Rosendell, Infantry
Gnr. M. Ross, Field Artillery
Spr. R. K. Rule, Engineers
Spr. J. R. Russell, Engineers
Pte. J. R. Russell, Pioneer Battalion
Sgt. W. Salmon, Light Horse Regiment
Act. Sgt. G. L. Salthouse, Pioneer Battalion
L. Cpl. A. Sandford, Pioneer Battalion
Dvr. L. F. Sandwell, Army Service Corps
Gnr. R. J. Savage, Field Artillery
Cpl. A. H. Scott, Field Artillery
Tpr. W. Scott, Light Horse Regiment
Gnr. J. Seabrook, Field Artillery
Spr. C. E. Seccombe, Engineers
Cpl. F. M. Sellick, Field Artillery
Bombr. W. G. Selway, Field Artillery
Cpl. S. H. Selwyn, Army Medical Corps
Pte. H. L. Sercombe, Army Medical Corps
Pte. D. L. Sharry, Army Medical Corps
Gnr. E. J. Sherriff, Field Artillery
Cpl. W. Sim, Infantry
Pte. W. H. Simpkins, Infantry
Dvr. A. D. Simpson, Infantry
Pte. R. Simpson, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. J. F. Sims, Engineers
Pte. B. J. Skilton, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. A. Skone, Engineers
Dvr. H. Smith, Field Artillery
Pte. I. L. Smith, Infantry
Sgt. J. A. Smith, Infantry
Dvr. J. W. Smith, Field Artillery
Sgt. S. A. Smith, Infantry
Cpl. V. G. Smith, Infantry
Cpl. J. Snowie, Infantry
Pte. J. Somerville, Infantry
Tpr. A. C. South, Machine Gun Corps
Act. Sgt. H. I. Spencer, Infantry
L. Cpl. H. Spiker, Army Service Corps
Pte. F. B. Stark, Infantry
Pte. C. J. R. Steel, Infantry
L. Sgt. E. H. C. Steel, Army Service Corps
Cpl. A. Stenhouse, Field Artillery
L. Sgt. V. C. Stevenson, Infantry
Spr. A. E. Stocqueler, Engineers
M.T. Driver J. Stoddart, Army Service Corps
Pte. E. E. Stolz, Army Medical Corps
Gnr. C. Stevens, Field Artillery
Pte. R. J. Stutz, Infantry
Cpl. F. Sliding, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. J. Suhan, Infantry
Bombr. W. H. Sutherland, Trench Mortar Battery, now Field Artillery
Pte. C. Sutton, Infantry
Pte. O. H. Swanson, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. J. G. Tarrant, Army Service Corps
Pte. J. S. Taylor, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. G. Teague, Army Medical Corps
Pte. C. Thomson, Infantry
Pte. J. Thomson, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. G. Toft, Engineers
Pte. J. Tognolini, Infantry
Pte. F. C. Tormay, Infantry
Cpl. H. J. Townsend, Infantry
Dvr. C. H. Turgoose, Army Service Corps
Dvr. G. Turton, A.S C
L. Cpl. B. W. Van Dyk, Infantry
Gnr. F. M. Veness, Field Artillery
Act. Bombr. G. K. Verco, Field Artillery
Tpr. G. Volp, Light Horse Regiment
L. Cpl. W. E. J. Wade, Pioneer Battalion
Tpr. J. Wade, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. W. P. Wade, Army Medical Corps
Cpl. H. F. Walker, Field Artillery
Cpl. W. Walker, Infantry
Cpl. G. Walters, Infantry
Act. Bombr. F. Warren, Field Artillery
Pte. J. H. Ward, Infantry
Pte. A. W. Watson, Infantry
Sgt. B. L. Watson, Infantry
Cpl. A. Webber, Infantry
Pte. G. Weiley, Infantry
Pte. A. Wellstead, Infantry
Tpr. W. West, Light Horse Regiment
Pte. A. E. Weston, Infantry
Sgt. A. E. Weymouth, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. H. Whelan, Army Service Corps
Spr. A. F. White, Engineers
Sgt. C. F. Whittle, Machine Gun Corps, late Dorsetshire Regiment (East Knighton)
Pte. H. Wilkes, Infantry
Pte. H. W. H. Williams, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. R. C. Williams, Pioneer Battalion
Spr. W. T. G. Williames, Engineers
Sgt. A. G. Wilson, Light Horse Regiment
Gnr. L. G. Wilson, Field Artillery
Bombr. T. J. Wilson, Garrison Artillery
Cpl. E. F. H. Wilton, Trench Mortar Battery
Pte. H. D. E. Withers, Infantry
Pte. F. J. T. Woods, Infantry
Gnr. G. B. Woods, Trench Mortar Battery, now Field Artillery
Pte. G. E. Wort, Army Medical Corps
Pte. C. E. Yates, Infantry
Pte. H. D. Young, Infantry
Gnr. A. J. Younger, Trench Mortar Battery
Sgt. E. H. Zelman, Infantry
Gnr. T. G. Abigail, Field Artillery
Pte. R. J. Adam, Infantry
L. Cpl. D. Adams, Infantry
Sgt. G. M. Adams, Infantry
Dvr. H. Adcock, Infantry
Bombr. J. S. Allah, Field Artillery
Pte. E. J. Allen, Infantry
Pte. A. W. Aldridge, Infantry
Pte. L. R. Arnheim, Army Medical Corps
Pte. N. H. Atkins, Infantry
Gnr. G. A. P. Atkinson, Field Artillery
Pte. A. Attick, Infantry
Dvr. W. J. Anderson, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. H. W. Austin, Engineers
Spr. J. Ayres, Engineers
Sgt. T. D. Baker, Field Artillery
Sgt. L. L. Barnes, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. W. H. Barnes, Army Medical Corps
Cpl. G. P. Barr, Infantry
L. Sgt. H. Barr, Infantry
Cpl. W. Bates, Infantry
Pte. R. R. Bell, Infantry
Pte. A. S. Bergmeir, Infantry
Pte. M. Beverly, Infantry
Pte. W. E. Beves, Infantry
Pte. E. Birch, Infantry
Pte. G. C. Black, Infantry
Dvr. R. W. Boardman, Infantry
Cpl. G. C. Bonython, Infantry
Cpl. C. Bowd, Engineers
Pte. S. G. P. Bowman, Infantry
Sgt. E. Brady, Infantry
L. Cpl. H. C. Brighton, Infantry
L. Cpl. C. A. Britton, Infantry
L. Sgt. W. F. Brook, Infantry
Pte. A. H. Brown, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. A. P. Brown, Machine Gun Corps
Spr. J. A. Brown, Engineers
Cpl. R. J. Bretherton, Field Artillery
Sgt. F. C. Bugden, Engineers
Sgt. E. S. Bulling, Anzac Provost Corps
Cpl. G. E. Burnell, Engineers
Pte. W. C. Burr, Infantry
Sgt. W. Burris, Field Artillery
Pte. R. U. Burt, Infantry
Pte. R. W. Bushell, Infantry
Gnr. A. T. Byrne, Field Artillery
Pte. A. J. Carter, Infantry
Sgt. L. L. Carter, Infantry
Pte. T. Carter, Infantry
Pte. E. Casey, Machine Gun Corps
Cpl. G. W. Cassell, Infantry
Pte. P. Chalmers, Infantry
Pte. T. M. Chalmers, Infantry
Spr. C. E. Chancellor, Engineers
Pte. F. Chartes, Infantry
Cpl. T. H. Champitt, Engineers
Dvr. A. Clarke, Field Artillery
Tmp Sergeant J. Clarke, Engineers
Far. Sergeant J. T. Clarke, Field Artillery
Pte. A. A. Clothier, Infantry
L. Cpl. H. A. Clothier, Engineers
Gnr. M. F. Cockburn, Field Artillery
Pte. E. D. Collings, Infantry
Pte. W. Colliver, Infantry
Cpl. G. E. Conley, Pioneer Battalion
Cpl. C. A. Coombes, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. C. W. Cooper, Machine Gun Corps
Cpl. F. S. H. Crafter, Infantry
Gnr. B. H. Crowley, Field Artillery
L. Sgt. R. J. Crowe, Infantry
L. Cpl. G. Cruickshank, Engineers
Cpl. H. G. Gumming, Infantry
Sgt. N. W. Daniel, Infantry
Pte. J. D'Arcy, Army Medical Corps
Spr. G. Davidson, Engineers
Gnr. D. Davies, Field Artillery
Sgt. H. F. Davis, Infantry
Pte. G. E. Dawson, Infantry
Spr. C. J. Deam, Engineers
Pte. S. J. Devitt, Infantry
Pte. D. E. Dickson, Army Medical Corps
Tmp Bombardier C. C. Dixon, Medium Trench Mortar Battery
Sgt. C. Donkin, Infantry
Pte. J. Downie, Pioneer Battalion
Pte. E. M. Dreger, Infantry
Pte. R. G. Drew, Infantry
Pte. T. M. Dunbar, Infantry
Pte. A. E. Dunkinson, Infantry
Pte. R. Austin, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. S. Dunstan, Army Service Corps
Pte. A. A. Durrington, Infantry
Pte. T. J. Dwyer, Infantry
Pte. C. W. J. Dykes, Infantry
Pte. W. Earl, Machine Gun Corps
Cpl. A. Easy, Engineers
Spr. N. L. Edmonds, Engineers
Cpl. A. W. Edwards, Infantry
Pte. C. Edwards, Infantry
Pte. E. B. Errington, Infantry
Pte. W. H. English, Infantry
Cpl. A. Erickson, Infantry
L. Cpl. S. F. Erwin, Infantry
Pte. H. Evans, Infantry
Cpl. W. J. Evans, Field Artillery
Pte. J. Fahey, Infantry
L. Cpl. A. E. Fergusson, Infantry
2nd Cpl. J. W. B. Fieldhouse, Engineers
Pte..E. F. Fox, Infantry
Staff Sergeant G. Francis, Anzac Provost Corps
Sgt. L. B. Franklin, Infantry
L. Cpl. L. Franks, Infantry
L. Cpl. E. N. Fraeer, Infantry
Sgt. E. H. Fry, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. E. Fugger, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. H. Fullwood, Pioneer Battalion
Pte. J. H. Gaffney, Infantry
Dvr. C. Gallop, Field Artillery
Sgt. H. J. Gardiner, Army Medical Corps
Pte. A. F. E. Gay, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. E. A. Gerdts, Infantry
Pte. H. E. Gibbs, Pioneer Battalion
Sgt. T. Gibson, Infantry
Staff Sergeant E. A. Godfrey, A. Dental Corps
Sgt. G. D. Gorry, Field Artillery
Cpl. W. J. Gourlay, Infantry
Gnr.N. B. Grainger, Field Artillery
L. Cpl. J. H. Green, Light Horse Regiment
Sgt. W. Greenlees, Infantry
Spr. H. V. Grose, Engineers
Gnr. A. C. Guerin, Field Artillery
Pte. P. L. Gundry, Army Medical Corps
Pte. J. G. Guthridge, Infantry
Pte. W. J. Hagan, Infantry
Tmp Cpl. J. C. Hageman, Infantry
L. Cpl. C. F. Hall, Army Service Corps
Pte. J. Hall, Infantry
Sgt. E. A. Halliday, Infantry
Pte. A. Hamilton, Infantry
Pte. W. H. Hammersley, Infantry
Pte. M. J. Hannigan, Light Trench Mortar Battery
Pte. O. T. M. Hansen, Army Medical Corps
Pte. D. J. Hardy, Infantry
Bombr. S. S. Hare, Medium Trench Mortar Battery
Sgt. C. F. W. Harris, Infantry
Sgt. H. P. Harris, Engineers
Gnr. M. Harte, Medium Trench Mortar Battery
Pte. O. J. Harwood, Infantry
Pte. F. C. Heiden, Infantry
Sgt. T. W. Heritage, Pioneer Battalion
Sgt. L. W. Hill, Engineers
Pte. J. Holland, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. Hook, Infantry
Dvr. C. S. Hougli, Field Artillery
Gnr. J. Hazelwood, Field Artillery
Sgt. J. W. Humphreys, Army Service Corps
Tmp Bombardier E. I. Hunter, Field Artillery
Pte. K. J. Hutton, Machine Gun Corps
Gnr. C. L. Irvine, Field Artillery
Pte. J. Irwin, Infantry
2nd Cpl. W. Irwin, Engineers
Cpl. E. A. Ison, Infantry
Sgt. A. H. Jackson, Infantry
L. Sgt. J. A. James-Wallace, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. J. Jameson, Engineers
Pte. W. H. Jenkins, Infantry
Pte. E. C. Jennings, Infantry
Sgt. J. Joel, Infantry
L. Cpl. C. H. Johansen, Infantry
Cpl. W. E. Johnson, Infantry
Cpl. A. Jones, Infantry
Pte. E. Jones, Infantry
Sgt. W. J. Jones, Pioneer Battalion
Sgt. L. Kaiser, Field Artillery
Pte. F. E. Kasenhagen, Infantry
Pte. A. T. Kermode, Infantry
Pte. E. V. Keogh, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. T. J. Keppel, Infantry
Pte. W. T. Kevin, Infantry
Pte. S. King, Infantry
Cpl. G. A. Kirkpatrick, Cyclist Corps
Pte. E. G. Knight, Infantry
Pte. W. A. Knight, Infantry
Dvr. W. B. Knox, Field Artillery
Pte. H. C. Lack, Infantry
Spr. B. C. Lancaster, Engineers
Pte. H. L. Larsen, Army Medical Corps
Tmp Cpl. B. P. Lavery, Machine Gun Corps
L. Cpl. A. J. Leahy, Engineers
Sgt. E. W. J. Lee, Pioneers
Pte. S. J. Lewis, Infantry
Sgt. W. H. Lister, Engineers
Pte. S. Littman, Infantry
Pte. G. J. A. Long, Infantry
Gnr. S. F. Loughlin, Field Artillery
Pte. W. Low, Infantry
Pte. J. W. Lowick, Infantry
Dvr. E. M. Lucas, Field Artillery
Sgt. E. A. Lukins, Infantry
Pte. T. S. W. Lusty, Infantry
Cpl. A. B. Macauley, Infantry
Cpl. E. G. Macauley, Army Medical Corps
Pte. P. MacGregor, Infantry
L. Cpl. A. Maciver, Infantry
Tmp Cpl. E. A. Maggs, Engineers
Tmp Cpl. C. P. Magowan, Machine Gun Corps
Sgt. F. W. Maher, Machine Gun Corps
Cpl. M. A. Mahony, Field Artillery
Sgt. F. Maltby, Infantry
L. Cpl. H. J. March, Infantry
Pte. B. G. S. Mason, Infantry
Cpl. H. S. Masters, Engineers
Dvr. F. J. Mattes, Infantry
Sgt. E. Maywood, Infantry
Pte. H. C. McAlpine, Infantry
Pte. H. P. McCosh, Infantry
Pte. C. J. McCompany, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. McDonnell, lnfantry
Pte. A. G. B. McEwan, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. P. McGrath, Infantry
Pte. T. J. McGregor, Infantry
Pte. A. McInnis, Infantry
Spr. P. McKenna, Engineers
Pte. P. F. McKinley, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. M. McLachlan, Infantry
Pte. D. McLaren, Infantry
Sgt. D. E. McLarty, Infantry
Pte. G. McLennan, Infantry
Bombr. H. F. McLeod, Field Artillery
L. Cpl. H. #. McLeod, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. J. J. McMahon, Infantry
Pte. E. McMaster, Infantry
Cpl. G. H. Mesh, Infantry
Pte. W. B. Midgley, Infantry
Gnr. B. C. F. Miller, Field Artillery
Pte. G. C. Miles, Infantry
Pte. K. Moles, Infantry
Pte. J. Moloney, Infantry
Tmp C.S. Maj. D. T. Moriarty, Machine Gun Corps
Gnr. S. E. Morley, Field Artillery
Pte. W. J. Morris, Infantry
Pte. J. H. Mumford, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. E. Munt, Infantry
Cpl. J. Napier, Infantry
Pte. P. V. Neilson, Infantry
2nd Cpl. H. Neville, Engineers
L. Cpl. A. E. Newell, Infantry
Pte. H. Newell, Infantry
Tmp Cpl. N. Nylander, Infantry
Pte. P. O'Donohue, Infantry
L. Cpl. S. O'Gorman, Infantry
Pte. J. O'Hara, Infantry
Spr. D. H. Oliver, Engineers
Pte. H. G. Oliver, Infantry
Pte. W. P. Oliver, Infantry
Cpl. G. D. O'Neil, Infantry
L. Cpl. A. T. Orton, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. L. A. Osborn, Infantry
L. Cpl. E. Ottosen, Infantry
Cpl. E. A. Painter, Light Trench Mortar Battery
Sgt. R. Parker, Infantry
Pte. W. Partridge, Infantry
Pte. W. L. Pass, Australian Army Medical Corps
Gnr. J. Paterson, Field Artillery
Pte. W. J. Patterson, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. J. H. Patterson, Infantry
Cpl. W. E. Peach, Infantry
Pte. A. V. Pethericky, Infantry
Pte. H. J. Pettingill, Infantry
2nd Cpl. W. W. Pinkhard, Lt. Railway Company
Pte. E. L. Pleass, Infantry
Pte. G. W. Pope, Infantry
Pte. A. A. Porter, Infantry
Pte. T. Porter, Infantry
Pte. W. F. Powell, Infantry
Pte. C. L. Power, Infantry
Cpl. A. Prentice, Infantry
L. Cpl. H. P. Prest, Infantry
Pte. J. T. Price, Trench Mortar Battery
Sgt. J. C. Proctor, Pioneer Battalion
Cpl. L. Pryde, Field Artillery
Sgt. C. S. Pugh, Machine Gun Corps
Cpl. J. E. Purdey, Engineers
Cpl. J. B. Quartermaine, Light Trench Mortar Battery
Pte. J. A. Quinlan, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. Regan, Army Medical Corps
Tmp Cpl. E. R. G. Rendell, Infantry
L. Cpl. G. C. Reynolds, Infantry
Pte. H. L. Riggs, Infantry
Bombr. R. D. Richards, Field Artillery
Pte. H. Ritchie, Infantry
Sgt. L. T. F. Robbins, Infantry
Dvr. E. J. S. Roberts, Field Artillery
L. Cpl. G. T. Roberts, Infantry
Pte. R. M. Robertson, Infantry
Pte. G. H. Robinson, Army Medical Corps
Gnr. B. R. Rochester, Field Artillery
Pte. M. F. Rowlings, Infantry
Sgt. J. Ryan, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. J. Saddington, Infantry
Pte. A. Y. Sambrook Infantry
Bombr. C. Sanders, Field Artillery
Spr. G. Sanderson, Engineers
Tmp Bombardier A. Scott, Field Artillery
Sgt. F. Scott, Infantry
L. Cpl. G. H. Scott, Infantry
Pte. W. J. Scott, Infantry
Pte. F. L. Schramm, Infantry
Tmp Sergeant W. H. Sedgley, Army Service Corps
Gnr. H. P. Sennett, Field Artillery
L. Cpl. W. J. Setter, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. P. Sexton, Infantry
Tmp Cpl. P. J. Sexton, Light Horse Regiment
Gnr. B. Seymour, Field Artillery
Pte. C. E. Seymour, Infantry
Pte. J. F. G. Shales, Infantry
Gnr.E. K. Sharp, Field Artillery
Pte. J.R. T. Sheahan, Light Trench Mortar Battery
Pte. J. Sheehan, Infantry
Pte. W. Shiels, Infantry, attd. Machine Gun Company
Sgt. O. A. Siden, Infantry
Pte. J. B. Skinner, Infantry
Gnr. E. H. Smith, Field Artillery
Sgt. H. J. Smith, Infantry
Pte. L. C. Smith, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. L. J. Smith, Pioneer Battalion
Pte. R. Smith, Infantry
Pte. T. Smith, Pioneer Battalion
Sgt. W. Smith, Infantry
Pte. W. D. Smith, Machine Gun Corps
Sgt. J. T. Spranklin, Infantry
L. Cpl. M. Stafford, Army Medical Corps
Pte. W. E. Stanbury, Infantry
Dvr. W. Steer, Army Medical Corps
Pte. A. H. Stevens, Infantry
2nd Cpl. A. M. Stewart, Engineers
Sgt. J. H. Stewart, Infantry
Sgt. G. H. Stoddart, Infantry
Cpl. L. R. Strother, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. W. J. Stuart, Infantry
Pte. F. H. Sullivan, Infantry
Pte. R. M. Sullivan, Infantry
Pte. L. J. Sunderland, Army Medical Corps
Pte. H. Talbot, Infantry
Sgt. H. S. Taylor, Field Artillery
Gnr. S. J. Taylor, Field Artillery
Spr. C. C. Tayt, Engineers
Pte. C. W. Thomas, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. H. Thomas, Infantry
Pte. N. J. F. Thomas, Army Medical Corps
Spr. H. Thompson, Engineers
Pte. A. R. Tibbetts, Infantry
Pte. D. W. Tobin, Infantry
Gnr. E. A. F. Tocknell, Field Artillery
L. Cpl. W. S. Touchell, Engineers
Pte. B. D. Tranter, Infantry
Pte. D. L. Treweek, Infantry
Pte. R. Trimble, Infantry
Pte. O. Tuami, Infantry
Pte. E. R. Tuck, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. A. B. Tucker, Field Artillery
Pte. W. Tucker, Infantry
Spr. F. C. Tuckett, Engineers
Pte. E. C. Turner, Infantry
L. Cpl. T. O. E. Upton, Machine Gun Corps
Dvr. E. C. Vickery, Infantry
Sgt. Warrant Officer Wade, Infantry
Pte. W. G. Wade, Infantry
Pte. W. R. Warren, Infantry
Pte. J. Weare, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. L. Webb, Infantry
L. Cpl. G. Webber, Infantry
Cpl. H. B. White, Infantry
Pte. W. J. Wilkie, Infantry
Sgt. E. Wilkinson, Engineers
L. Sgt. F. Williams, Infantry
Sgt. G. S. Williams, Pioneer Battalion
Pte. H. G. Williams, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. H. M. Williams. Engineers
Pte. J. H. Wills, Infantry
Pte. E. Winter, Infantry
Tmp Sergeant A. W. Wood, Infantry
Cpl. S. Woodford, Light Trench Mortar Battery
Gnr. J. C. Woolford, Field Artillery
Spr. A. C. N. Woolley, Engineers
L. Cpl. J. J. H. Worland, Lt. Railway Company
Sgt. W. A. Wright, Infantry
Pte. C. B. Young, Infantry
Sgt. G. M. Young, Infantry
Cpl. J. E. Abbey, Army Medical Corps
L. Sgt. E. Abelscaln, Anzac Prov. Corps
Pte. M. C. Aberdeen, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. A. S. Adolfsson, Infantry
Pte. A. Alexander, Infantry
Sgt. A. O. Anderson, Infantry
Sgt. H. L. Appleton, Infantry
Pte. P. L. Arnold, Infantry
Pte. L. Atherton, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. G. Arthur, Infantry
L. Cpl. R. S. Baker, Infantry
Spr. J. H. Baillie, Engineers
Pte. D. Bain, Infantry
Pte. W. R. Bear, Infantry
Pte. H. Barnes, Infantry
Pte. P. E. Bazley, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. L. Beggs, Infantry
Pte. H. H. Bell, Infantry
Pte. M. R. Bell, Infantry
Pte. R. C. Bellingham, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. Benson, Army Medical Corps
Pte. M. Bernier, Infantry
Pte. J. C. Berriman, Machine Gun Corps
L. Cpl. H. V. Berry, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. C. Birtles, Infantry
Sgt. A.E. Bladwell, Infantry
Sgt. F. W. Blencowe, Infantry
Pte. W. G. Bliss, Army Medical Corps
Pte. J. M. Boardman, Army Medical Corps
Cpl. M. C. Bonnar, Engineers
Pte. H. Bowden, Infantry
Sgt. T. F. Bowden, Infantry
L. Cpl. D. H. Brereton, Infantry
Cpl. E. G. Brewer, Infantry
Cpl. F. G. Briscoe, Pioneer Battalion
Spr. H. F. Broadbent, Engineers
Pte. P. J. Broder, Infantry
Pte. W. Bromwich, Infantry
Pte. W. H. Brooksbank, Trench Mortar Battery
Cpl. R. Brown, Infantry
Pte. A. Browne, Infantry
Sgt. J. F. Burton, Infantry
Pte. A. L. Cadman, Infantry
Pte. E. E. Calf, Army Medical Corps
Dvr. W. E. Callaghan, Army Service Corps
Sgt. R. McL. Campbell, Infantry
Pte. H. C. Capon, Infantry
L. Cpl. F. J. Caporn, Infantry
L. Cpl. S. G. Carter, Infantry
Pte. J. I. Chadwick, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. H. D. Chapman, Infantry
Cpl. S. J. Clark, Infantry
Pte. A. E. Clayton, Infantry
Dvr. H. F. Coates, Army Service Corps
L. Cpl. R. L. Collen, Army Service Corps
Pte. L. W. Colley-Priest, Army Medical Corps
Pte. J. H. Connors, Army Medical Corps
Pte. O. S. Cook, Infantry
Sgt. S. F. Cooling, Infantry
Pte. J. W. Coots, Army Medical Corps
Pte. W. D. Cornish, Infantry
Pte. J. R. Cosgrove, Infantry
Pte. A. E. Costin, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. W. Cotter, Infantry
Pte. W. H. Coull, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. L. Crawford, Infantry
Sgt. M. H. Cummings, Army Service Corps
Sgt. J. Cummins, Inf
Pte. G. Davidson, Infantry
Pte. J. F. Dawes, Infantry
L. Sgt. R. J. Denny, Infantry
Pte. L. S. Deviland, Infantry
Dvr. P. G. Dixen, Army Service Corps
Sgt. R. C. Dunbar, Engineers
Pte. A. S. E. Earnshaw, Infantry
L. Sgt. T. Eccles, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. E. Este, Army Medical Corps
Pte. A. W. Fairgrieve, Engineers
Pte. J. Ferguson, Infantry
Sgt. M. M. Fitzpatrick, Machine Gun Corps
L. Cpl. 6. J. Flynn, Army Medical Corps
Capt. H. W. Franks, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. W. D. Fraser, Infantry
Pte. J. H. P. Frazer, Infantry
L. Cpl. C. R. Fry, Infantry
Sgt. C. E. Fuller, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. D. Fulton, Infantry
Sgt.. A. F. H. Gabriel, Infantry
Pte. P. J. Gilchrist, Infantry
Pte. J. Glover, Infantry
Pte. R. T. Godfrey, Infantry
Sgt. R. O. Goldsmith, Infantry
Pte. T. Gorman, Infantry
Pte. M. S. Goyder, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. F. G. Grange, Infantry
Pte. R. E. Grant, Infantry
Pte. W. C. Gray, Infantry
Pte. G. Green, Infantry
Spr. T. A. Griffiths, Engineers
L. Cpl. J. H. Grono, Infantry
Pte. A. J. Gummersall, Infantry
L. Cpl. F. Hallam, Infantry
Sgt. A. Hardie, Infantry
Pte. H. L. S. Harrop, Infantry
Pte. J. W. Hart, Infantry
Sgt. J. T. McK. Harvie, Infantry
Tmp Cpl. C. H. Hatt, Infantry
Pte. G. T. Hayden, Infantry
Pte. A. Haysom, Army Medical Corps
Pte. L. Hermon, Infantry
Pte. J. J. Hewitson, Infantry
Pte. W. A. Hippsley, Army Medical Corps
Pte. H. J. Hockley, Infantry
Pte. G. H. B. Holloway, Infantry
Pte. A. Holman, Infantry
Pte. W. A. Hooper, Infantry
Pte. G. Hope, Army Medical Corps
Pte. G. T. Hopper, Infantry
Sgt. E. Hopwood, Infantry
Pte. F. W. Howell, Infantry
Pte. W. D. Hume, Infantry
L. Cpl. A. J. Hunt, Army Medical Corps
Pte. R. M. Ilett, Infantry
Cpl. R. A. Jackson, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. L. James, Engineers
Pte. J. H. Johns, Infantry
L. Cpl. D. W. Johnson, Infantry
L. Cpl. P. Kelly, Infantry
Cpl. W. C. Ketchen, Infantry
Cpl. L. H. Kew-Ming, Infantry
Sgt. E. Kidman, Army Medical Corps
Pte. P. J. King, Infantry
L. Cpl. C. Larson, Anzac Provost Corps
Pte. W. J. A. Layburn, Infantry
Dvr. A. F. Lemon, Army Medical Corps
Cpl. V. M. Letman, Infantry
Pte. J. Lewis, Infantry
Pte. A. Lillico, Infantry
Pte. A. L. Lindeberg, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. F. Lindsay, Infantry
Pte. H. W. Liviston, Infantry
Cpl. J. L. Lovell, Machine Gun Corps
Sgt. B. E. Luke, Infantry
Tmp Cpl. P. J. Lynch, Infantry
Pte. J. J. Madigan, Infantry
Sgt. R. D. Marrott, Army Medical Corps
Cpl. H. Marshall, Infantry
Cpl. E. A. C. Marshman, Infantry
L. Cpl. D. G. Martin, Machine Gun Corps
Tmp Cpl. A. W. Marura, Infantry
Tmp Sergeant R. E. Massey, Infantry
Sgt. J. Masterton, Infantry
Sgt. A. H. Matheson, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. W. Mathews, Engineers
Dvr. W. J. Mathews, Infantry
Pte. W. F. Matthews, Infantry
Pte. H. G. McCaffery, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. A. McCallum, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. McCallum, Army Medical Corps
Pte. N. S. McColl, Infantry
Pte. C. McCormack, Infantry
Spr. G. L. V. McDonald, Engineers
Sgt. W. H. McKeon, Infantry
Pte. R. McNamara, Infantry
Pte. H. McNaughton, Infantry
Pte. J. F. R. McRae, Infantry
Pte. H. Meyers, Trench Mortar Battery
Pte. W. A. H. Miller, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. G. Milner, Infantry
Pte. E. W. Moberley, Infantry
Tmp Sergeant R. W. Moffatt, Infantry
Pte. M. Molloy, Infantry
Pte. C. R. Moore, Infantry
L. Cpl. D. G. Moore, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. J. J. Moran, Infantry
Pte. E. Morley, Army Medical Corps
Pte. J. T. Morley, Infantry
Spr. L. W. Morris, Engineers
Pte. W. B. Morris, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. E. G. Murray, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. J. W. Naylor, Infantry
Pte. A. C. Neale, Infantry
Cpl. R. H. Nelson, Infantry
Pte. H. R. Nicholas, Army Medical Corps
Pte. T. A. Nicholson, Infantry
Cpl. S. J. Nimmo, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. N. Noble, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. C. L. Normington, Infantry
Dvr. J. Nute, Army Service Corps
Cpl. A. J. G. O'Connor, Infantry
Pte. P. R. O'Connor, Infantry
L. Sgt. H. R. O'Neil, Infantry
Pte. F. O. Oliver, Army Medical Corps
Spr. J. G. Pannell, Engineers
Pte. L. T. Paternoster, Army Medical Corps
Pte. R. J. Pearce, Infantry
Sgt. W. Pearson, Infantry
Pte. H. D. Phipps, Trench Mortar Battery
Pte. A. S. H. Picking, Army Medical Corps
Pte. C. H. Piddington, Infantry
Cpl. W. C. Piggott, Infantry
Pte. W. J. J. Piper, Infantry
Pte. R. J. Place, Infantry
Cpl. W. Pollard, Infantry
Pte. C. W. Potter, Infantry
Pte. W. J. Pound, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. H. Powell, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. W. G. Price, Infantry
Sgt. A. G. Prime, Infantry
Pte. P. S. Proudfoot, Infantry
Pte. J. Puckeridge, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. Pugh, Infantry
Sgt. J. J. Radley, Infantry
Sgt. J. W. Raitt, Infantry
Tmp Sergeant P. E. Ralph, Infantry
Cpl. C. Ramsden, Infantry
Pte. A. J. Ray, Army Medical Corps
Pte. L. J. Rayner, Infantry
Pte. J. T. Rees, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. H. A. Richards, Infantry
Pte. J. W. Ridgway, Army Medical Corps
Pte. G. J. Ritchie, Infantry
Sgt. D. Roberts, Infantry
Pte. W. S. Robins, Machine Gun Corps
Cpl. R. Roff, Infantry
Pte. J. Rollins, Infantry
Pte. A. S. Rookwood, Infantry
Pte. J. R. Rowley, Infantry
Pte. F. Saffin, Infantry
Pte. E. Saker, Army Medical Corps
Pte. B. Shaw, Infantry
Sgt. G. J. Shepperd, Infantry
Cpl. C. A. Silk, Army Medical Corps
Pte. A. G. Smith, Infantry
L. Sgt. N. H. Smith, Light Horse Regiment
Pte. S. Smith, Infantry
Sgt. W. A. Smith, Light Horse Regiment
Pte. W. S. Smith, Army Medical Corps
Cpl. H. Spotswood, Infantry
Pte. H. Stevenson, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. J. H. Stewart, Infantry
Pte. R. J. Strachan, Infantry
Cpl. E. T. Symons, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. R. W. Thomas, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. F. Thompson, Infantry
L. Cpl. V. V. Thorpe, Army Medical Corps
Pte. J. Thyne, Infantry
Spr. G. S. H. Tierney, Engineers
Pte. W. R. Tooley, Infantry
Pte. V. Toppin, Infantry
Cpl. E. J. Trent, Infantry
Cpl. C. L. Trewartha, Infantry
Sgt. A. Troope, Army Medical Corps
Pte. T. W. Turnbull, Infantry
Pte. F. J. Turner, Infantry
Pte. S. J. Tytler, Infantry
Sgt. V. Vains, Infantry
Pte. W. Varrie, Infantry
L. Cpl. H. N. Wallace, Infantry
Sgt. A. A. Walls, Infantry
Pte. H. J. Warburton, Infantry
Pte. E. R. Ward, Infantry
Sgt. L. R. Ward, Infantry
Pte. R. J. Ward, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. W. Ward, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. J. M. S. Wasson, Army Medical Corps
Cpl. G. Watson, Engineers
Pte. E. R. Watts, Army Medical Corps
Pte. F. West, Infantry
Sgt. J. Whitmee, Infantry
Pte. F. W. Wiggins, Army Medical Corps
Pte. F. M. Wilkinson, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. P. Williams, Infantry
Pte. H. E. Williamson, Infantry
Spr. A. J. Wilson, Engineers
Spr. R. S. Wilson, Engineers
L. Cpl. M. F. Wormald, Infantry
Cpl. C. H. Wyatt, Infantry
Cpl. G. Young, Trench Mortar Battery
L. Cpl. G. E. Younie, Infantry
Canadian Force
Gnr. L. C. Axton, Garrison Artillery
Cpl. G. R. Bagshawe, Railway Troops
Cpl. E. Baker, Machine Gun Corps
Sgt. A. L.Bardwell, Railway Troops
Spr. J. E. Bates, Engineers
Spt. J. M. Beatty, Engineers
Dvr. F. H. Bousquet, Field Artillery
Spr. H. J. Brazier, Engineers
Cpl. F. Burgess, Engineers
Sgt. F. S. Butler, Army Medical Corps
Pte. T. Canning, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. N. Dorey, Engineers
Pte. G. T. Davis, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. W. M. Doyle, Machine Gun Corps
Spr. M. G. Evans, Engineers
Sgt. J. A. D. Frechette, Machine Gun Corps
L. Cpl. M. Fredin, Labour Battalion
Cpl. J. Gaskell, Railway Troops
Cpl. R. S. Greenaway, Army Medical Corps
Cpl. S. A. Hamilton, Railway Troops
Pte. J. V. Hartwell, Machine Gun Corps
Cpl. G. A. Johnson, Railway Troops
Dvr. H. King, Army Service Corps
Pte. J. F. Livingston, Labour Battalion
L. Cpl. J. MacDonald, Engineers
Pte. D. Mackenzie, Machine Gun Corps
Cpl. F. P. McKenna, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. L. McLaren, Machine Gun Corps
Spr. C. C. Maddison, Railway Troops
Sgt. M. E. Martin, Army Medical Corps
Pte. F. J. Miles, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. A. F. Morrison, Railway Troops
Spr. C. M. Patmore, Engineers
Pte. S. J. Patterson, Army Medical Corps
Sgt. W. A. Plant, Army Medical Corps
Cpl. P. C. Rawling, Railway Troops
2nd Cpl. D. Reid, Engineers
Pte. H. H. Riley, Army Medical Corps
Pte. J. M. Ritchie, Army Medical Corps
Cpl. F. E. Ross, Army Medical Corps
Pte. G. C. Sanson, Machine Gun Corps
Spr. W. A. Scott, Railway Troops
Dvr. G. A. Shatford, Army Service Corps
Spr. A. Smith, Railway Troops
Cpl. J. Smith, Garrison Artillery
Pte. F. A. Smithers, Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. J. Steadman, Railway Troops
Spr. R. Stephenson, Engineers
Pte. G. J. Tomlinson, Army Medical Corps
Spr. G. Trutch, Engineers
Spr. H. G. Vines, Engineers
Spr. E. W. Wilson, Engineers
Pte. E. M. Webber, Machine Gun Corps
2nd Cpl. W. A. Young, Engineers
Pte. W. Le R. Collins, Infantry
Pte. J. Llewellyn, Infantry
Pte. D. A. Bell, Infantry
Pte. H. Bolton, Infantry
Pte. W. Bowden, Infantry (Pioneers)
Dvr. A. Collings, Field Artillery
Sgt. G. Cross, Infantry
L. Cpl. G. E. Curtis, Engineers
Pte. J. O. Davidson, Infantry
Spr. A. V. Dolman, Railway Troops
Sgt. L. S. Eiler, Infantry
Bombr. W. Fallas, Field Artillery
Dvr. F. J. Gray, Field Artillery
Gnr. W. S. Hamilton, Field Artillery
Pte. F. Hill, Infantry
Sgt. J. H. Jarvis, Infantry
Sgt. G. Love, Machine Gun Corps
Bombr. B. C. Macdonald, Field Artillery
Sgt. J. F. MacNaughton, Field Artillery
Sgt. T. R. Maitland, Infantry
Sgt. J. Marshall, Railway Troops
Sgt. J. McCallum, Infantry
Cpl. G. E. McCarthy, Infantry
Sgt. W. G. McCullagh, Infantry
Pte. A. P. McDonald, Light Trench Mortar Battery
L. Sgt. N. McIntosh, Infantry
Sgt. C. McKinney, Infantry
Dvr. A. G. Moore, Army Service Corps
Sgt. G. W. Morrison, Infantry
Pte. A. Oakes, Infantry
Sgt. E. Ofstedahl, Infantry
Sgt. S. Packham, Infantry
Dvr. H. A. Paquette, Army Service Corps
Sgt. E. T. Raike, Field Artillery
Act. Sgt. L. R. Reece, Army Service Corps
Pte. G. Richards, Infantry
Pte. C. T. Saunders, Infantry (Pioneers)
Sgt. G. W. Scots, Infantry
Spr. W. V. Shepherd, Engineers
Spr. B. Speight, Railway Troops
Pte. G. Spourles, Infantry
Pte. W. R. Stobart, Infantry
Sgt. J. C. Stocker, Infantry
Sgt. V. Swayne, Infantry
Dvr. S. Trewin, Field Artillery
Sgt. G. W. Trollope, Infantry
Cpl. S. B. Wareham, Field Artillery
New Zealand Force
Bombr. A. Ashworth, Field Artillery
Gnr. C. M. Blackwell, Field Artillery
Tpr. N. M. Douglas, Mounted Rifles
Gnr. G. C. Girdlestone, Field Artillery
Cpl. W. R. Graham, Mounted Rifles
Tpr. W. R. D. Laurie, Mounted Rifles
Gnr. J. R. MacLean, Field Artillery
Bombr. W. Mawdsley, Field Artillery
Tpr. H. McGuckin, Mounted Rifles
Gnr. E. W. Moore, Field Artillery
Gnr. P. Murphy, Field Artillery
Tpr. J. Smillie, Mounted Rifles
Dvr. R. P. Sperry, Field Artillery
Tpr. D. W. Thomson, Mounted Rifles
Signaller Cpl. G. S. Watt, Mounted Rifles
Tpr. J. Wilkinson, Mounted Rifles
L. Cpl. O. F. T. Young, Mounted Rifles
Pte. R. M. V. Abbott, Otago Regiment
L. Cpl. V. Atkinson, Canterbury Regiment
Pte. J. T. Baigent, Canterbury Regiment
Sgt. A. G. Bowater, Otago Regiment
L. Cpl. M. C. Bromell, Canterbury Regiment
Sgt. F. D. Carter, Canterbury Regiment
Pte. G. Chandler, Otago Regiment
Act. Sgt. B. V. Cooksley, New Zealand Engineers
Pte. O. Creighton, Otago Regiment
L. Cpl. A. W. Danby, New Zealand Engineers
Pte. T. Dron, Canterbury Regiment
Sgt. C. M. Duncan, Otago Regiment
L. Cpl. A. G. Erikson, Canterbury Regiment
Pte. P. Everett, Canterbury Regiment
L. Sgt. G. E. Fletcher, Otago Regiment
L. Cpl. D. McM. Fullarton, New Zealand Engineers
Spr. J. W. Garnett, New Zealand Engineers
Pte. J. Gillon, Canterbury Regiment
Pte. J. Glassey, Canterbury Regiment
Pte. A. C. Graham, Canterbury Regiment
Sgt. T. W. Harrington, Canterbury Regiment
Cpl. R. W. Hawkes, Otago Regiment
Cpl. C. F. V. Hinton, Canterbury Regiment
Spr. J. Houston, New Zealand Engineers
2nd Cpl. A. A. Howard, New Zealand Engineers
Pte. A. Hudson, Otago Regiment
Pte. J. R. Hunter, Otago Regiment
Cpl. T. O. Johnson, Canterbury Regiment
Dvr. R. Johnstone, New Zealand Engineers
Pte. R. H. Louden, Otago Regiment
Cpl. R. McDowell, Canterbury Regiment
Pte. B. McKay, Canterbury Regiment
Spr. J. W. McKay, New Zealand Engineers
Pte. J. McRohan, Canterbury Regiment
Pte. R. F. Melgren, Canterbury Regiment
Pte. E. A. Millis, Otago Regiment
Pte. T. A. Mooney, Otago Regiment
Pte. H. W. E. Morris, Otago Regiment
Pte. J. H. Morris, Canterbury Regiment
Pte. K. Morrison, Otago Regiment
Pte. M. L. Nelsen, Canterbury Regiment
Sgt. A. G. Newcomb, New Zealand Machine Gun Corps
Cpl. A. H. Nield, Canterbury Regiment
2nd Cpl. L. A. Noble, New Zealand Engineers
Pte. D. P. Noonan, Canterbury Regiment
Cpl. L. J. Palmer, New Zealand Engineers
Cpl. H. Parker, Otago Regiment
Pte. L. J. K. Parker, Otago Regiment
Sgt. R. A. Parton, Canterbury Regiment
Cpl. B. Paulson, Otago Regiment
Cpl. R. Quin, Otago Regiment
Pte. G. L. Rowe, Canterbury Regiment
Pte. S. E. Rutherford, Otago Regiment
Cpl. H. J. Simon, Otago Regiment
Sgt. F. W. P. Simpson, Canterbury Regiment
Cpl. R. Smith, Canterbury Regiment
Spr. A. Springall, New Zealand Engineers
L. Cpl. F. W. Stevenson, Canterbury Regiment
Sgt. J. Stuart, New ZealandMachine Gun Corps
L. Cpl. W. Sullivan, Otago Regiment
L. Cpl. L. L. Tallke, Otago Regiment
Spr. A. E. Taylor, New Zealand Engineers
2nd Cpl. G. H. Thorpe, New Zealand Engineers
L. Cpl. D. N. Treleaven, New Zealand Engineers
Sgt. H. H. Turner, Canterbury Regiment
Pte. S. R. Tutty, Otago Regiment
Sgt. A. L. M. Willis, New Zealand Engineers
L. Cpl. J. A. Wilson, New Zealand Engineers
Pte. L. E. J. Worthington, Wellington Regiment
Pte. J. W. Young, Otago Regiment
Pte. J. Adams, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. L. F. Allan, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. J. E. Allen, Canterbury Regiment
Pte. E. E. Andrews, M Corps
Pte. C. J. Arnold, Rifle Brigade
Pte. A. T. W. Austin, M Corps
Pte. F. W. Baillie, M Corps
Pte. F. Backholm, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. G. B. Baker, Cyclist Corps
L. Cpl. J. M. Ballantyne, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. W. Barclay, Pioneer Battalion
Sgt. H. C. Bathurst, Rifle Brigade
Dvr. G. Bergaminin, Army Service Corps
Sgt. W. A. Birkett, Engineers
Sgt. J. H. Boles, Rifle Brigade
Pte. A. B. Booker, Rifle Brigade
Gnr. W. Brown, Field Artillery
Pte. F. Bruce, M Corps
Far. Sergeant O. C. H. Burt, Field Artillery
Spr. A. Bushill, Engineers
Cpl. J. H. Calderwood, Rifle Brigade
L. Cpl. A. Cameron, Engineers
L. Cpl. A. K. Campbell, Rifle Brigade
Pte. S. F. Carver, M Corps
Cpl. F. R. Cashmore, Rifle Brigade
Cpl. A. C. Clark, Rifle Brigade
L. Cpl. H. G. Clark, Engineers
L. Cpl. F. A. Clarke, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. K. M. Cole, Field Artillery
L. Cpl. W. J. Collins, Rifle Brigade
Gnr. W. R. Costar, Field Artillery
Pte. G. S. Creed, Wellington Regiment
Sgt. C. H. Davis, Field Artillery
Sgt. H. Dean, Rifle Brigade
Cpl. A. E. Deaine, Canterbury Regiment
Pte. A. Diack, Otago Regiment
Gnr. A. E. Dockery, Field Artillery
Pte. W. T. Douglas, Rifle Brigade
Act. Cpl. J. Duggan, Engineers
Sgt. H. M. Duston, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. W. B. Easton, Field Artillery
L. Sgt. A. C. Elliott, Rifle Brigade
Wheeler Cpl. O. Evans, Divisional Train, Army Service Corps
Gnr. R. E. Everett, Field Artillery
Pte. A. Everitt, Rifle Brigade
L. Cpl. A. Flett, Rifle Brigade
Spr. C. E. Fogelberg, Engineers
Pte. E. J. Flynn, Canterbury Regiment
Pte. T. F. Forrest, Auckland Regiment
Cpl. A. E. Gibb, Engineers
L. Sgt. O. A. Gillespie, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. T. A. Goodfellow, Rifle Brigade
Pte. G. H. Gradwell, Rifle Brigade
Pte. C. A. Gray, Rifle Brigade
Cpl. F. V. Green, M Corps
Cpl. W. Gribble, Rifle Brigade
Tpr. R. Guthrie, Mounted Rifles
Pte. R. Hayter, Rifle Brigade
Pte. M. Hennessy, Rifle Brigade
Dvr. G. E. Henry, Field Artillery
Pte. C. Hinds, Wellington Regiment
Sgt. C. P. Hine, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. F. J. Hodgson, Machine Gun Corps
L. Cpl. J. A. Hornblow, Engineers
L. Cpl. E. Hughes, Pioneer Battalion
Pte. F. G. Hutchins, Rifle Brigade
Pte. P. W. Jesse, Rifle Brigade
Staff Sergeant A. M. Johnstone MC
Pte. D. G. Jones, M Corps
Pte. F. K. Judd, Rifle Brigade
Cpl. S. A. Kay, Machine Gun Corps
Sgt. H. W. Keesing, M Corps
Pte. L. A. Kyle, M Corps
Pte. J. F. Laing, Canterbury Regiment
Sgt. H. J. Langwell, Rifle Brigade
Pte. A. J. Lark, M Corps
Pte. H. T. Leef, Pioneer Battalion
Cpl. H. S. Leighton, Rifle Brigade
Cpl. T. Lonergan, Machine Gun Corps
Dvr. W. Lorgelly, Machine Gun Corps
Sgt. D. A. MacGibbon, Field Artillery
Cpl. Fitter J. H. Mains, Field Artillery
Bombr. D. Malone, Field Artillery
Cpl. W. Manson, M Corps
Sgt. J. Martindale, Field Artillery
Dvr. S. Mason, Field Artillery
L. Cpl. G. Maxwell, Pioneer Battalion
Cpl. J. McAusland MC
Sgt. W. McClure, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. A. McDonald, Rifle Brigade
2nd Cpl. W. D. McKinlay, Engineers
Staff Sergeant A. D. McLennan, M Corps
Pte. A. McLean, Rifle Brigade
Spr. H. McMillan, Engineers
Sgt. J. W. C. Menzies, Rifle Brigade
L. Cpl. W. Methven, Rifle Brigade
Pte. F. A. Meurant, Rifle Brigade
L. Cpl. L. W. G. Millward, Field Artillery
Cpl. A. Monkman, Rifle Brigade
A Bombardier E. Mowbray, Field Artillery
Pte. J. M. Munro, Rifle Brigade
Cpl. J. Nunn, Pioneer Battalion
Pte. J. Newberry, Rifle Brigade
L. Cpl. R. Nagapo, Pioneer Battalion
Spr. L. O. Nicolas, Engineers
Cpl. T. B. O'Connor, Machine Gun Corps
Pte. C. O'Driscoll, Rifle Brigade
Pte. P. O'Neill, Rifle Brigade
Pte. H. F. Orpwood, Rifle Brigade
Cpl. W. Overend, Wellington Regiment
Sgt. J. C. Pain, Rifle Brigade
Pte. E. I. Paine, M Corps
L. Cpl. J. Panoho, Pioneer Battalion
L. Cpl. V. W. Pearce, Rifle Brigade
Pte. R. M. Pearson, M Corps
Sgt. W. T. Pethybridge, Auckland Regiment
Sgt. E. E. Pope, Field Artillery
L. Cpl. L. H. Postlewaight, Machine Gun Corps
Spr. D. Pringle, Engineers
A Sapper J. K. Ramsey, Engineers
Pte. K. Ray, Auckland Regiment
Gnr. F. V. H. Robinson, Field Artillery
L. Cpl. L. Robinson, Army Service Corps
Sgt. A. Rogers, Pioneer Battalion
Sgt. H. L. Ross, Field Artillery
Pte. H. F. Russell, Auckland Regiment
Gnr. W. Sandison, Field Artillery
Dvr. J. R. A. Scrimshaw, Field Artillery
Pte. C. M. Sheat, Rifle Brigade
L. Cpl. G. H. Shelley, Engineers
Sgt. W. D. Smaill, Field Artillery
Pte. F. Smith, Rifle Brigade
Pte. W. K. Smith, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. C. C. Southey, Cyclist Corps
L. Cpl. O. Staite, Rifle Brigade
Pte. D. Stevenson, Rifle Brigade
Pte. A. Stewart, M Corps
Pte. S. G. Stirling, Rifle Brigade
L. Cpl. C. S. Stunell, M Corps
Cpl. D. M. Stuart, Wellington Regiment
Pte. J. Sullivan, Otago Regiment
Pte. D. Tavendale, Machine Gun Corps
L. Cpl. A. Taylor, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. W. G. Taylor, Rifle Brigade
Pte. P. Te Amo, Pioneer Battalion
Sgt. C. G. Tomlinson, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. F. G. Tott, Wellington Regiment
L. Cpl. C. E. Town, Rifle Brigade
Pte. W. Toy, M Corps
Cpl. L. E. Tucker, Field Artillery
Pte. W. C. Turner, Rifle Brigade
Spr. J. Walker, Engineers
Cpl. G. R. Watts, Rifle Brigade
Sgt. W. A. White, Rifle Brigade
Gnr. W. C. White, Field Artillery
Pte. E. Williams, Canterbury Regiment
Gnr. T. Williams, Field Artillery
A Cpl. W. B. Yeoman, Army Service Corps
Newfoundland Contingent
Pte. J. Abbott, Newfoundland Regiment
Pte. A. Adams, Newfoundland Regiment
Sgt. E. P. Aitken, Newfoundland Regiment
Pte. H. Bowden, Newfoundland Regiment
Pte. A. Bulgin, Newfoundland Regiment
Sgt. E. Butcher, Newfoundland Regiment
Col. H. S. Butler, Newfoundland Regiment
Pte. J. Davis, Newfoundland Regiment
Pte. J. Dunn, Newfoundland Regiment
Cpl. L. J. Fitzpatriok, Newfoundland Regiment
Pte. E. Goudy, Newfoundland Regiment
Pte. A. Hennebury, Newfoundland Regiment
Pte. W. Jewer, Newfoundland Regiment
Pte. P. McDonald, Newfoundland Regiment
Pte. W. Moore, Newfoundland Regiment
Pte. J. E. B. Nichol, Newfoundland Regiment
Pte. L. Paddick, Newfoundland Regiment
Pte. C. Pafford, Newfoundland Regiment
Pte. F. S. Rees, Newfoundland Regiment
Cpl. H. Tansley, Newfoundland Regiment
South African Force
Cpl. H. J. Fredericks, Cape Corps
2nd Cpl. F. J. Keates, Engineers
2nd Cpl. A. E. Dawson, South African Engineering Corps
Sgt. W. F. Hunter, South African Engineering Corps
Pte. C. I. Jacobs, South African Medical Corps
Pte. F. W. Parfitt, South African Medical Corps
Pte. H. S. Pearce, South African Medical Corps
Pte. R. Tomsett, South African Medical Corps
Sgt. T. J. Badcoe, Infantry
L. Sgt. E. M. V. Barrable, Infantry
Pibe. R. C. Biccard, Infantry
Pte. A. J. Black, Infantry
Sgt. F. H. Brickhill, Infantry
Pte. V. Carlson, Infantry
Pte. T. P. Casey, Infantry
L. Cpl. W. Cawthorn, Infantry
Pte. R. M. Collins, Infantry
Pte. T. Cook, Infantry
Cpl. H. F. Cox, Infantry
Pte. J. J. Cronje, Infantry
Sgt. A. Cummings, Infantry
Pte. W. A. de Beer, Infantry
Pte. G. Fairbairn, Infantry
Pte. C. E. Fennesy, Infantry
Spr. B. P. Ferrero, Engineers
L. Cpl. J. L. Forman, Infantry
Sgt. H. H. Frohbos, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. A. Gaston, Infantry
Pte. F. Goldsworthy, Infantry
Pte. A. Gray, Infantry
Pte. P. R. Greenhough, Infantry
Pte. H. L. Hare, Infantry
Pte. W. S. Harris, Infantry
Sgt. W. C. Hawke, Infantry
Pte. M. A. Holliday, Infantry
Pte. R. J. Holmes, Infantry
Pte. W. B. Huntley, Infantry
Sgt. W. N. James, Infantry
Pte. P. D. Jones, Infantry
Pte. W. G. Langlands, Infantry
Cpl. A. Lavarack, Infantry
Pte. R. J. Lawrence, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. J. Loubser, Infantry
Pte. W. Mackay, Infantry
Pte. A. G. McL. Mackintosh, Infantry
L. Cpl. D. McGregor, Infantry
Pte. S. G. Mills, Infantry
Sgt. T. H. Nichols, Infantry
L. Cpl. J. E. T. Noble, Infantry
Sgt. W. A. Norvall, Infantry
Pte. J. G. Parkinson, Infantry
L. Cpl. H. F. Pentz, Infantry
Pte. A. Rennie, Infantry
Cpl. A. Ryder, Infantry
Pte. R. C. Scott, Infantry
L. Cpl. F. R. Shapcott, Infantry
Sgt. J. Shearer, Infantry
Pte. G. S. Shephard, Infantry
Cpl. J. N. Simpson, Infantry
Pte. A. W. C. Smith, Infantry
L. Cpl. R. G. Stephen, Infantry
L. Cpl. M. W. Surmon, Infantry
Pte. L. H. Suttie, Infantry
Sgt. J. Symonds, Infantry
Cpl. W. Willcocks, Infantry
Pte. C. H. Wright, Infantry
Pte. W. N. Sobey, Infantry
East African Force
Cpl. F. A. Schroeder, Cape Corps
Sgt. G. H. Waldeck, Infantry
African Native Troops
Sgt. Abdulla bin Hassan, King's African Rifles
Pte. Alukuri, Nigeria Regiment
Pte. Girwa bin Kamisi, King's African Rifles
Sgt. Mafindi Shewa, Nigeria Regiment
Pte. Mallam Duchi, Nigeria Regiment
Pte. Moma Sokoto, Nigeria Regiment
Pte. Tanko I., Nigeria Regiment
Awarded a Bar to the Military Medal (MM*)[edit]
Spr. W. Paddock, Royal Engineers (Manchester)
Cpl. E. Hallatt, Royal Engineers (Liverpool)
Cpl. T. Baker, Royal Field Artillery (Abingdon)
Sgt. J. Malia, RAMC (Newcastle-on-Tyne)
Sgt. E. Fuller, Australian Army Service Corps
Sgt. S. Davies, Cheshire Regiment (Birkenhead)
L. Cpl. H. T. Jones, London Regiment (Clapham)
Spr. H. C. Rycroft, Royal Engineers (Colne)
2nd Cpl. R. R. White, Royal Engineers (Leamington-on-Tyne)
Sgt. E. Aldridge, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Pimlico)
Cpl. C. C. Bradly, Canadian Machine Gun Corps
Pnr. J. W, Barrass, Royal Engineers (Felling)
Sgt. T. W. Barkes, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Heanor)
Sgt. J. H. Tucker, Devonshire Regiment (Dartmouth)
Sgt. A. J. McKinnon, Australian Infantry
Sgt. J. B. Smith, Manchester Regiment (Pendleton)
Cpl. C. Speller, RAMC (Nutana, Canada)
Pte. J. Tipping, RAMC (Belfast)
Gnr. W. J. Austin, Royal Field Artillery (Norwich)
L. Cpl. W. G. Cawte, Devonshire Regiment (Heywood)
Pte. A. S. Bruce, Royal Engineers (Sunderland)
Cpl. A. W. Willingham, Australian Infantry
Cpl. E. Bell, Royal Field Artillery (Brockley)
Sgt. R. H. B. Malcolm, Australian Army Medical Corps
Sgt. R. Brown, Northumberland Fusiliers (Seaton)
Cpl. W. Buchanan, Cameron Highlanders (Glasgow)
Sgt. G. Carter, Royal Field Artillery (Liverpool)
Sgt. J. Cutts, York & Lancaster Regiment (Yorkshire)
Cpl. G. Staples, RAMC (Tulse Hill)
Sgt. J. R. Forrest, Australian Division, Trench Mortar Battery
Sgt. R. L. Edwards, Canadian Machine Gun Corps
Sgt. R. H. MacKenzie, Canadian Machine Gun Corps
Cpl. R. Baird, Royal Field Artillery (Fauldhouse)
Cpl. P. Docherty, Royal Field Artillery (Sunderland)
Sgt. S. H. Martin, Royal Fusiliers (Silverdale)
Sgt. O. Oakes, Manchester Regiment (Moulton)
Sgt. W. G. Smith, Canadian Field Artillery
Pte. C. B. Pearson, Australian Infantry
Pte. F. Buckley, Australian Pioneer Battalion
Cpl. W. J. Cooper, Australian Infantry
Sgt. F. J. McEwan, Australian Infantry
Sgt. H. V. Mayt, London Regiment (Fulham)
Sgt. E. Sales, South Staffordshire Regiment (Mansfield)
Air Mechanic, 1st Class, S. R. Deane, Royal Flying Corps (London)
Sgt. J. Collyer, Royal Garrison Artillery (Staten Island, N.Y.)
Petty Officer G. Young, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (Forfar)
L. Cpl. P. Pratt, Australian Army Medical Corps
Sgt. J. McIntyre, East Yorkshire Regiment (Choppington)
Gnr. W. F. Parkes, Royal Garrison Artillery (E. Stockton)
Act. Cpl. A. Pirie, Labour Corps (Aberdeen)
Sgt. A. V. English, Gloucestershire Regiment (Fakenham)
L. Sgt. A. A. Goulding, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Nottingham)
Bombr. J. Jackson, Royal Field Artillery (Chelsea)
Cpl. H. J. Samuels, Royal Field Artillery (Liverpool)
Petty Officer E. C. Davies, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (South Elmsall)
Sgt. H. Buckle, Royal Garrison Artillery (Yorkshire)
Cpl. E. Partridge, South Staffordshire Regiment (Walsall)
Pte. H. Reddaway, Machine Gun Corps (Coppleston)
Pte. G. H. Beadle, Australian Infantry
L. Sgt. R. Giessler, Australian Infantry
Pte. E. Wilkinson, Australian Infantry
Pte. W. Atkinson, Northumberland Fusiliers (Scarborough)
L. Cpl. E. J. Foreman, Lancashire Fusiliers (Stockton-on-Tees)
Pte. J. Low, Gordon Highlanders (Glasgow)
Pte. J. McLeod, Gordon Highlanders (Glasgow)
Pte. F. J. Shirley, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Handsworth)
Sgt. R. Tippen, Gordon Highlanders (Newmilns)
Dvr. E. M. Lucas, Australian Field Artillery
Pte. H. C. McAlpine, Australian Infantry
Pte. T. Porter, Australian Infantry
Sgt. H. J. Smith, Australian Infantry
L. Cpl. D. Fenner, Australian Army Medical Corps
Pte. C. F. Ellingsen, Australian Army Medical Corps
L. Cpl. T. J. Price, Australian Army Medical Corps
Sgt. F. Barnes, Machine Gun Corps (Oldham)
Pte. T. Hailstones, Royal Highlanders (Hamilton)
Sgt. R. E. Russell, Royal Engineers (Bristol)
Pte. W. Sanders, Oxfordshire & Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (Wolverton)
L. Cpl. T. H. Rose, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Middleton Junction)
C.Q.M.S. A. E. Toner, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. E. G. Ludlow, Royal Berkshire Regiment (E. Reading)
Pte. A. Hoatson, South African Infantry
Sgt. P. Blent, Rifle Brigade (Moorlands)
Sgt. H. Cox, Machine Gun Corps (Ropsley)
Pnr. A. R. Dennis, Royal Engineers (Thornton Heath)
Cpl. J. T. Anthony, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (Barry Dock)
Pte. G. H. P. Lyons, Royal Warwickshire Regiment (Warboys)
Sgt. W. H. Young, Royal Field Artillery (Westcombe Park, London)
Gnr. H. Blount, Royal Garrison Artillery (Croydon)
L. Cpl. J. Quinn, York & Lancaster Regiment (Glasgow)
Pte. G. L. Hampton, Australian Infantry
Spr. R. T. Whitehorn, Royal Engineers (Eyremount)
L. Cpl. J. Birch, Royal Engineers (Baschurch)
Pte. A. H. Renshaw, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Stoke)
Cpl. W. Wilcock, Northumberland Fusiliers (Sheffield)
Pte. A. Robinson, Australian Infantry
L. Cpl. C. W. Wignell, Australian Infantry
Pte. J. Tomlinson, Machine Gun Corps (Castleton)
Sgt. B. R. Walker, East Yorkshire Regiment (Hull)
Sgt. W. F. Bartlett, Machine Gun Corps (Bradford)
Sgt. J. W. Lambourn, Royal Berkshire Regiment (Reading)
Cpl. F. Greenway, Australian Light Trench Mortar Battery
Pte. W. Cairns, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (Glasgow)
L. Sgt. R. Clark, Lincolnshire Regiment (Retford)
Gnr. G. Cobban, Royal Field Artillery (Leith Pettercairn)
Cpl. G. Stirling, Scots Guards (Edinburgh)
Cpl. L. Mellor, Royal Field Artillery (Dewsbury)
Sgt. F. Sherwin, Royal Field Artillery (Birshall)
Spr. E. Taylor, Royal Engineers (Harlington)
L. Cpl. T. G. Williams, Royal Engineers (Norbury)
Pte. A. Bennett, Royal Highlanders (Dundee)
Pte. P. Gethins, Royal Highlanders (Kingham)
Act. Sgt. E. J. Lloyd, Durham Light Infantry (Dudley)
Sgt. P. C. Walker, Machine Gun Corps (Hampstead)
Pte. G. W. Pratt, Australian Infantry
Pte. H. E. Fielder, Hampshire Regiment (Southampton)
Cpl. W. Lewis, Machine Gun Corps (Haggliscote)
Pte. J. McNeil, East Yorkshire Regiment (Wishaw)
Cpl. J. Cummings, Royal Field Artillery (Greenock)
Pte. J. Gardiner, Royal Scots (Wamphrey)
Pte. G. Gilhespy, Royal West Surrey Regiment (Fence Houses)
Spr. J. A. Guy, Australian Engineers
L. Cpl. F. G. Hamilton, Australian Army Medical Corps
Sgt. B. Jones, RAMC (Wrexham)
Sgt. W. Neale, Worcestershire Regiment (Wolverton)
Sgt. W. Waldron, Machine Gun Corps (Wolstanton)
2nd Cpl. W. H. Long, Australian Engineers
Pte. C. T. Wilton, Australian Infantry
Pte. J. Crilley, Scottish Rifles (Rutherglen)
Pte. J. Hill, Royal Scots (Cleland)
Sgt. S. J. Kay, RAMC (Liverpool)
Cpl. A. Kerr, Royal Scots (Douglas Water, by Lanark)
Pte. V. A. Mess, Royal Fusiliers (Dover)
Pte. E. A. Corey, Australian Infantry
Sgt. A. V. Fergusson, Australian Infantry
Sgt. A. Stephenson, RAMC (Wigan)
Cpl. F. Reay, Worcestershire Regiment (Walsall)
Pte. A. Binks, North Lancashire Regiment (Bolton)
Cpl. T. Morrisey, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Liverpool)
Pte. J. Pownall, South Lancashire Regiment (Bickerstaffe)
Cpl. R. Aspinwall, Liverpool Regiment (Southport)
Sgt. F. W. Ball, Royal Lancaster Regiment (Tring)
Pte. A. Davies, Liverpool Regiment (Bootle)
Cpl. J. Farrington, Liverpool Regiment (Southport)
Sgt. A. W. Harrington, Essex Regiment (Dagenham)
Cpl. H. MacNicoll, Liverpool Regiment (Liverpool)
Pte. J. Territt, Royal Dublin Fusiliers (Rathstewart)
Pte. T. J. Meaney, Newfoundland Regiment
L. Cpl. W. Buckley, Depot, Cheshire Regiment (Chester)
Sgt. G. B. Cruickshank, Royal Highlanders (Dundee)
L. Cpl. F. Doncaster, King's Royal Rifle Corps (Clerkenwell)
L. Cpl. G. H. Elson, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Askern, Yorkshire)
Sgt. C. H. Flood, Cambridgeshire Regiment (Wisbech)
L. Cpl. G. J. Graham, Royal Fusiliers (Ilford)
Pte. P. Harrison, RAMC (St. Helens)
Pte. A. Hawbrook, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment (Hetheringham, Lincolnshire)
Sgt. W. J. Litchfield, Hertfordshire Regiment (Stevenage)
L. Cpl. H. Livermore, Rifle Brigade (Hartford End, Essex)
Pte. L. Bell, York & Lancaster Regiment (Barnsley)
Pte. G. R. Milthorpe, Australian Infantry
Gnr. T. Ward, Royal Field Artillery (Fulham)
Awarded a Second Bar to the Military Medal (MM**)[edit]
Cpl. L. P. Smardon, Canadian Regiment
L. Cpl. A. Breeze, Worcestershire Regiment (Dudley)
Cpl. K. Goodwin, Gordon Highlanders (Stirling)
Sgt. S. Forbes, Depot, York & Lancaster Regiment (E. Aberdeen)
Indian Order of Merit (IOM)[edit]
Second Class
Lance Dafadar Anokh Singh, Cavalry
Dafadar Puran Singh, Cavalry
Indian Distinguished Service Medal (IDSM)[edit]
Dvr. Alia Dad, Royal Horse Artillery
Dvr. Lehna Singh, Royal Horse Artillery
Sowar Man Singh Cavalry
Sowar Mool Singh, Cavalry
Dafadar Bhoor Singh, Cavalry
Lance Dafadar Ali Hassan, Cavalry
Dafadar Atta Muhammad Khan, Cavalry
Act. Lee Dafadar Sobha Singh, Cavalry
Sowar Rati Ram, Cavalry
Risaldar Khurshed Muhammad Khan, Cavalry
Act. Dafadar Parbhu Dayal, Cavalry
Sowar Jaimal Singh, Cavalry
Lance Dafadar Niadar Singh, Cavalry
Jemadar Kale Khan, Cavalry
Risaldar Tek Singh, Cavalry
Jemadar Habib Gul, Cavalry
Jemadar Sardar Khan, Cavalry
Dafadar Abdul Satar Khan, Cavalry
Lance Dafadar Nawab All Khan, Cavalry
Sowar Sarain Singh, Cavalry
Dafadar Sangar Khan, Cavalry
Sowar Fauja Singh, Cavalry
Jemadar Alam Sher, Cavalry
Jemadar Adalat Khan, Cavalry
Jemadar Khuda Baksh Khan, Cavalry
Dafadar Alia Ditta Khan, Cavalry
Sowar Muhammad Jan, Cavalry
Act. Lance Dafadar Bur Singh, Cavalry
Act. Lance Dafadar Musali Khan, Cavalry
Dafadar Ram Sarup, Cavalry
Sowar Mir Ronak All, Cavalry
Sowar Autar Singh, Cavalry Ward Ordly
Mahmud Ali Khan, Cavalry
Sowar Asta Buddin, Cavalry Ressalder Balwant Singh, Cavalry
Dafadar Abdur Rahim Khan, Cavalry
Dafadar Dale Ram, Cavalry
Dafadar Pirthi Singh, Cavalry Jemadar Anno Khan, Cavalry
Jemadar Taj Muhammad Khan, Cavalry
Dafadar Sher Bahadur Khan, Cavalry
Dafadar Jehan Khan, Cavalry
Lance Dafadar Akram Khan, Cavalry
Dafadar Khandara Singh, Cavalry
Dafadar Labh Singh, Cavalry
Act. Lee. Dafadar Arjan Singh, Cavalry
Sowar Nand Singh, Cavalry
Havildar Kala Singh, Royal Garrison Artillery, Indian Army
Ward Ordly. Umrao Singh, Infantry
1st Grade Hospital Store Keeper Rup Chand Khana, Supply and Transport Corps
Sub. Asst Surg Parmanand Misra, Indian Sub. Medical Service
1st Class Sub. Asst Surg George Julian Ferris, Indian Sub. Medical Service
1st Class Sub Asst Surgeon Ram Lai Abrole, Indian Sub. Medical Service
Lance Havildar Budhoo, Army Bearer Corps
Bearer Binda, Army Bearer Corps
King's Police Medal (KPM)[edit]

King's Police Medal with the riband for gallantry
England and Wales
Police Forces
Lt.-Col. The Hon. George Augustus Anson MVO Chief Constable of Staffordshire
George Morley, Chief Constable of Hull
James Anniwell, Superintendent and Deputy Chief Constable of the Bedfordshire Constabulary
Henry Hand, Superintendent and Deputy Chief Constable of the Breconshire Police
Superintendent John H. Gillbanks, of the Somersetshire Police
Superintendent Patrick Quinn MVO of the Metropolitan Police Force
Sgt. Staple, of the Somersetshire Police Force
Constable Alfred Bence, of the Metropolitan Police Force
Constable Herbert Bradbury, of the Lancashire Constabulary
Constable Charles Dednum, of the Metropolitan Police Force
Constable James Hardacre, of the Lancashire Constabulary
Constable James Hardy, of the Metropolitan Police Force
Constable John Nelson Kent, of the Blackpool Police Force
Constable Ambrose Jolleys, of the Lancashire Constabulary
Constable Matthew Landy, of the Metropolitan Police Force
Constable George Legrove, of the City of London Police Force
Constable Charles Penn, of the Metropolitan Police Force
Constable Augustus Ralph, of the Metropolitan Police Force
Constable Robert George Wilson, of the Metropolitan Police Force
Fire Brigades
Chief Officer Edward James Abbott, of the Barking Fire Brigade
Fireman James Joseph Betts, West Ham Fire Brigade
Station Officer Samuel Scott Betts, West Ham Fire Brigade
Fireman Henry Chappie, West Ham Fire Brigade
Sub-Officer Landias Mathunn, West Ham Fire Brigade
First-Class Fireman Ernest Milsted, West Ham Fire Brigade
Fireman Frederick Charles Sell, West Ham Fire Brigade
Fireman James Henry Rich Yabsley, West Ham Fire Brigade
Sub-Officer Henry Vickers, West Ham Fire Brigade
Scotland
Police Forces
Constable William Tair Brown, of the Glasgow City Police Force
Charles George, Chief Constable of Kincardine
Fire Brigades
Firemaster William Inkster, of the City of Aberdeen
Ireland
Police Forces
Robert John O'Sullivan, Acting Sergeant of the Royal Irish Constabulary
John Fitzhugh Gelston, County Inspector of the Royal Irish Constabulary
Fergus Quinn, Assistant Commissioner, Dublin Metropolitan Police
William P. Bannon, Superintendent of the Dublin Metropolitan Police
Sgt. James Gunn, of the Royal Irish Constabulary
Constable Michael Barry, of the Royal Irish Constabulary
Constable Daniel Brennan, of the Dublin Metropolitan Police
Constable Patrick Downing, of the Dublin Metropolitan Police
Constable Alexander McDonald, of the Royal Irish Constabulary
Awarded a Bar to the King's Police Medal
Sgt. John Barton, of the Dublin Metropolitan Police
British India
Police Forces
Walter Henry Wright, Assistant Superintendent of Police, Madras Police
Golla Simhachellam, Sub-Inspector of Police, Godavari district, Madras Police
Abdul Aziz Sahib, Inspector of Police, Godavari district, Madras Police
Nandi Kishora Padhi, Inspector of Police, Vizagapatam district, Madras Police
Roy Havelock Haslam, Assistant Superintendent, Agency Police, Kathiawar, Bombay Police
Rajabkhan Daudkhan, Fourth Grade Head Constable in the Kaira District Police, Bombay Police
Peter Sullivan, Superintendent of the Criminal Investigation Department, Bombay City Police
Abdul Satar Khan walad Sobdar Khan, Inspector of Police, Fourth Grade, Karachi District (acting Third Grade), Bombay Police
MalayActing Ganpat, Acting Second Grade Inspector of Police in the Poona District, Bombay Police
Khan Saheb Imam Muhammad, a Third Grade Inspector of Police, Criminal Investigation Department, Bombay Presidency
Gerald Sidney Wilson, Deputy Commissioner of Police for the part of Bombay
Ganu Dhansrng, a Second Grade Head Constable, District East Khandesh (retired)
Nalini Nath Mazumdar, Inspector, Calcutta Police, Bengial Police
Sashi Bhusan Bhattacharji, Inspector of Police, Bengal
Rajemdra Nath Basu, Inspector of Police, Bengal
Narendra Nath Mukharji, Sub-Inspector of Police, Bengal
Jamir Khan, Constable, Bengal Police
Robert Martin Wright, Superintendent of Police, Bengal
Amrita Lai Singh, Head Constable, Calcutta Police
Azam Khan, Head Constable, Bengal Police
Ram Sakal Gosain, Head Constable, Bengal Police
Jogendra Chandra Gupta, Sub-Inspector of Police, Intelligence Branch, Criminal Investigation Department, Bengal Police
Ala Ahmad, Constable of the Budaun district, United Provinces Police
Bhagwant Singh, Sub-Inspector, Station Officer of Islamnagarthana, Budaun District, United Provinces Police
Muhammad Khan, Constable of the Kheri district, United Provinces Police
George Grosvenor Bruce Iver, Superintendent of Police, Jheilum district, Punjab Police
Mohammad Rashid, Head Constable, Ferozepore district, Punjab Police
Haider Ali, Sub-Inspector, Ludhiana district, Punjab Police
Faiz-ul-Hassan, Sub-Inspector, Punjab Police
Mirza Muraj-ud-Din, Inspector, Punjab Police
Malcolm James Chisholm, Deputy Inspector-General of Police for Railways and Criminal Investigation, Burma Civil Police
Charles Arthur Reynell, District Superintendent of Police Henzada, Burma Civil Police
Sita Ram, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Burma Civil Police
Maung Kyaung Ba Inspector of Police (retired), Burma Civil Police
Pahalman Chettri, 1st Grade Jemadar, Arakan Hill Tracts Military Police Battalion, Burma Military Police
Arratoon Catchick, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Officiating District Superintendent of Police, Kathia, Burma Civil Police
Henry St. John Morrison, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Bihar and Orissa, Civil Police
Swarup Narayan Singh, Jamadar, Military Police Company, Bhagalpur, Bihar and Orissa Military Police
Khwaja Muhammad Akram Khan, Deputy Superintendent, Central Provinces Police
Singfair Gharti, Subadar Lushai Hills Military Police Battalion, Assam Military Police
Khan Sahib Helimulla, Officiating Deputy Superintendent of Police, Sylhet district, Assam Civil Police
Jangbir Lama, Subadar, Lakhimpur Military Police Battalion, Assam Military Police
Eric Charles Handyside, Superintendent of Police, 4th Grade, North-West Frontier Province Police
Zabhir Gul Khan, Inspector, 4th grade, North-West Frontier Province Police
Malik Mazaffar Khan, Inspector, 3rd grade, North-West Frontier Province Police
Thomas Henry Morony, District Superintendent of Police, 4th grade, Indian Police (Indore State Police)
Samuel Thomas Hollins, Superintendent of Police, 5th grade, Inspector-General of Tonk State Police
Adalat Khan, Head Constable, Baluchistan Police
Ernest Woodburn Trotter, District Superintendent, Burma Civil Police
Reginald Charles Whiting, District Superintendent, Burma Civil Police
Overseas Dominions
Police Forces
James Frendo Azopardi MVO Senior Assistant Superintendent of Police, Malta
William Kilmuster Notley, Commissioner of Police, East Africa Protectorate
Lt.-Col. Charles Riddick, Commissioner of Police and Prisons, Uganda Protectorate
Robert Evans Lett, Staff Instructor, Gold Coast Police
Col. William Eden Clark, Inspector-General of Police and Commandant of local forces, British Guiana
Imperial Service Medal (ISM)[edit]
Home Civil Service
William Addis, Overseer, London Postal Service
Walter Alfred Barnes, First Class Messenger, Treasury
Frederick John Bayfield, Detail Plotter, Publication Division, Ordnance Survey, Southampton
George Bennett, Postman, Mitcham
Alfred Biffen, Overseer, London Postal Service
John Blackwood, Postman, Kinross
William Thomas Blake, Foreman, Army Ordnance Department, Woolwich
Samuel Francis Boden, Postman, Birmingham
Owen Sylvester Bond, Shipwright, Portsmouth Dockyard
Frederick William Bucknell, Overseer (Telegraphs), London Postal Service
Valentine Pike Burbidge, Assistant Head Postman, London Postal Service
Alma Ephraim Austin Burden, Second Class Draughtsman (Overseer), Portsmouth Dockyard
James Burke, Preventive Officer, Liverpool
Francis Burns, Postman, Portadown
Thomas Butland, Assistant Inspector of Postmen, Torquay
John Butler, Leading Man of Wharf, Royal Clarence Yard, Gosport
William Woodward Butler, Postman, Ganstead, S.O. Hull
Duncan Urquhart Brown, First Engineer (Yardcraft), Portsmouth Dockyard
Alfred John Carter, Assistant Inspector of Postmen, Exeter
John Caryl, Postman, Cowley SO., Exeter
George Chadwick, Assistant London Postal Service Head Postman
Benjamin Walter Samuel Chambers, Telegraphist, Central Telegraph Office
Richard William Chapman, Sorting Clerk and Telegraphist, Leeds
Christopher Byatt Comben, Warder, Portland Prison
Ellen Cooke, Matron, Class IV, Shrewsbury Prison
Richard John Cooper, Principal Warder, Portland Prison
Thomas John Cooper, Patternmaker, Chatham Dockyard
James Crone, Chief Worktaker, Central Office, Ministry of Munitions
Stephen Richard Davey, Shipwright, Devon-port Dockyard
Emily Rosa Davies, Assistant Supervisor, Class II, Central Telegraph Office
Ernest John Edward Davis, Postman, Portsmouth
John Dixon, Postman, Preston
Frederick William Drew, Examiner of Drawings, Control Division, Ordnance Survey, Southampton
Joseph Drinkwater, Postman, Gloucester
William Berry Dyson, Assistant Inspector of Postmen, Huddersfield
James Farrar, Assistant Inspector, Post Office, Blackburn
Arthur Fewell, Assistant Inspector, Post Office, Sutton
William Gamwell, Postman, Northallerton
William Garwood, Stamper, Office of Inspector of Stamping, Inland Revenue
James Richard Ernest Gaston, Postman, London Postal Service
Giovanni Gatt, Foreman of Stores, Naval Store Department, Admiralty
Andrew Gibson, Postman, Belfast
William Grave, Overseer (Postal), Liverpool
Richard Horatio Green, Assistant Inspector of Tracing, Accountant-General's Department, General Post Office
George Edward Harris, Postman, Harlow
George Harvey, Postman, Gloucester
William John Head, Second Class Storerman, Stores Department, General Post Office
James Heard, Shipwright, Chatham Dockyard
Thomas Hennessy, Postman, Kildare, Newbridge, Ireland
Charles Samuel Hill, Mate in charge of War Department Vessels, War Office
William Sycamore Hill, Postman, Sutton
Jessie Eliza Housden, Sorting Clerk and Telegraphist, Wimborne
Joseph Hudson, Postman, Warwick
Gabriel Hughes, Inspector of Messengers, Central Telegraph Office
Edward Jones, Postman, Liverpool
Robert Jones, Shipwright, Pembroke Dockyard
Edwin James Lake, Skilled Labourer, Portsmouth Dockyard
Robert Lawson, Postman, Glasgow
William Thomas Leonard, Postman, Rochdale
Mary Elizabeth Liddle, Assistant Supervisor, Post Office, Carlisle
George William Lock, Telegraphist, Central Telegraph Office
Mary Lomax, Sorting Clerk and Telegraphist, Manchester
George William Long, Sorting Clerk and Telegraphist, Boston
Henry Lord, Preventive Officer, Sunderland
Edward Lovell, Postman, Eastbourne
Andrew Low, Inspector of Storehousemen, Chatham Dockyard
Patrick M'Donnell, Postman, Slane, Drogheda
James M'Geoch, Inspector, Engineering Department, General Post Office
Daniel M'llgorm, Customs and Excise Officer, Holyhead, Carnarvon
Arthur Samuel Madge, Sorter, London Postal Service
William Mash, Rigger (Chargeman), Sheerness Dockyard
Walter Mason, Paper-Keeper, Money Order Department, General Post Office
David Millar, Postman, Coatbridge
James Nelson, Postman, Crossgar, Belfast
William Newburn, Shipwright, Chatham Dockyard
William Noot, Shipwright, Pembroke Dockyard
William Parsons, Warder, Grade I, Brixton Prison
Charles Henry Penrose, Ship Fitter, Devonport Dockyard
Harry Perks, Assistant Inspector of Postmen, Buxton
Thomas Reekie, Postman, Auchtermuchty, Ladybank
Arthur James Richards, Fitter, Chatham Dockyard
Ralph Robinson, Overseer, Post Office, Stockton-on-Tees
Alfred Robert Rose, Sorter, London Postal Service
John Sandham, Postman, Fleetwood
Elizabeth Scowcroft, Telegraphist, Central Telegraph Office
William Kinnear Shannon, Postman, Dundee
Edna Jane Sharpe, Matron, Class I, Leeds Prison
William Shearman, Postman, York
Margaret Sheret, Counter Clerk and Telegraphist, London Postal Service
George Sinclair, Head Office Keeper and House Keeper, Foreign Office
Charles Smith, Postman, London Postal Service
George Henry Smith, Shipwright, Devonport Dockyard
William Stewart, Skilled Labourer, Devonport Dockyard
Robert Scott Taylor, Labourer, Leeds Prison
Robert Tillett, Shipwright, Portsmouth Dockyard
John Thomas Tozer, Skilled Labourer, Devonport Dockyard
William Richard Upjohn, Postman, Lyme Regis, S.O. Axminster
William Wardrop, Foreman, Engineering Department, General Post Office
Frances Mary Isabella Webber, Assistant Supervisor (Telegraphs), Bath
Charles Arthur Wells, Examiner of Tracings, Control Division, Ordnance Survey, Southampton
Alfred George White, Sorter, London Postal Service
Henry James Whittle, Telegraphist, Central Telegraph Office
Edward Whitwell, Postman, Kendal
Joseph William Wickenden, Skilled Labourer, Sheerness Dockyard
Alfred John Wilkins, Photographic Writer, Publication Division, Ordnance Survey, Southampton
Edwin Williams, Ship Fitter, Chargeman, Devonport Dockyard
References[edit]
Jump up ^ The London Gazette: (Supplement) no. 30451. pp. 79C86. 1 January 1918.
Jump up ^ The London Gazette: (Supplement) no. 30460. pp. 365C409. 4 January 1918.
^ Jump up to: a b The London Gazette: (Supplement) no. 30460. pp. 365C409. 7 January 1918.
Jump up ^ The London Gazette: (Supplement) no. 30464. pp. 471C481. 8 January 1918.
Jump up ^ The London Gazette: (Supplement) no. 30507. pp. 1599C1621. 4 February 1918.
Jump up ^ The London Gazette: (Supplement) no. 30576. pp. 3283C3290. 15 March 1918.
Jump up ^ "New Year Honours C The Official Lists, New Peers And Baronets, Long Roll Of Soldiers.". The Times (The Times Digital Archive). 1 January 1918. pp. 7C8.
Jump up ^ The London Gazette: (Supplement) no. 31296. pp. 4975C4990. 15 April 1919.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e The London Gazette: no. 30494. pp. 1227C1228. 25 January 1918.
Jump up ^ "Mr. Galsworthy, O.M.". The Times (The Times Digital Archive). 1 February 1933. p. 15.
Jump up ^ The Edinburgh Gazette: no. 13225. p. 1048. 19 March 1918.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Corrections: The London Gazette: no. 30535. pp. 2211C2212. 13 February 1917.
[hide] v t e
Honours Lists
New Year Honours	
1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 1897 1898 1899 1900 1901 1902? 1903 1904 1905 1906 1907 1908 1909 1910 1911 1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940? 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 1947 1948 1949 1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
?Not issued because of Birthday Honours of new king (1902) and WWII (1940)
Birthday Honours	
1885 1886 1887? 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 1897? 1898 1899 1900 1901 1902 1903 1904 1905 1906 1907 1908 1909 1910 1911? 1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937? 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 1947 1948 1949 1950 1951 1952 1953? 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
?Not issued because of Jubilee Honours (1887, 1897) and Coronation Honours (1911, 1937, 1953)
PM's Resignation Honours	
1945 1951 1955? 1957? 1963 1964 1970 1976 1979? 1990 1997 2007? 2010? 2016
?Not issued
Coronation Honours	
1902 1911 1937 1953
Dissolution Honours	
1874 1885 1892 1895 1900 1906 1910 (January) 1910 (December) 1918 1922 1923 1924 1929 1931 1935? 1945 1950 1951? 1955? 1959 1964 1966 1970 1974 (February) 1974 (October) 1979 1983 1987 1992 1997 2001 2005 2010 2015
?Not issued
Special Honours	
2009 2013 2014 2015 2016
Additional Honours	
1887 (Golden Jubilee) 1897 (Diamond Jubilee) 1923 Prime Minister 1935 (Silver Jubilee) 1977 (Silver Jubilee) 1990 (Queen Mother's 90th Birthday) 2002 (Death of Queen Mother and Princess Margaret) 2002 (Golden Jubilee) 2012 (Diamond Jubilee)
Honours by nation	
Australia Canada Ceylon India New Zealand
Categories: New Year Honours1918 awards1918 in Australia1918 in Canada1918 in India1918 in New Zealand1918 in the United Kingdom
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
Languages
Add links
This page was last modified on 26 July 2016, at 12:17.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Wikipedia talk:Requests for adminship
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Skip to TOC Skip to bottom
	This is not the page to nominate yourself or another editor to be an administrator. To do so, please follow these instructions.
[hide] v t e
Requests for adminship (RfA), bureaucratship (RfB), and past request archives (search)
Administrators	
Requests for adminship edit watch RfA talk new post archives RfA guide / miniguide Advice for candidates Advice for voters Arguments to avoid Successful RfAs RFA by month alphabetical chronological Unsuccessful RfAs alphabetical chronological Inactive administrators Nominate someone for adminship Pre-RfA opinion poll Request an RfA nomination
Shortcut:
WT:RFA
Bureaucrats	
Noticeboard Successful RfBs alphabetical chronological Unsuccessful RfBs alphabetical chronological Bureaucrat discussion
Useful pages	
Former administrators RFA reform User rights log Old log Meta log Meta old log
Current admin count: 1,297 (list all) Current bureaucrat count: 22 (list all)
RfA candidate	S	O	N	S%	Ending (UTC)	Time left	Dups?	Report
RfB candidate	S	O	N	S%	Ending (UTC)	Time left	Dups?	Report
No RfXs since 22:36, 11 July 2016 (UTC).cyberbot ITalk to my owner:Online

Current time: 18:15:40, 29 July 2016 (UTC)
Purge this page

Latest RfXs (update)
Candidate	Type	Result	Date of close	Tally
S	O	N
Steel1943	RfA	Withdrawn	11 Jul 2016	19	12	1
BU Rob13	RfA	Successful	9 Jul 2016	155	30	6
Xaosflux	RfB	Successful	9 Jul 2016	173	1	1
Jo-Jo Eumerus	RfA	Successful	5 Jul 2016	168	3	1
Checkingfax	RfA	WP:SNOW	1 Jul 2016	4	25	0
Anarchyte	RfA	Withdrawn	16 Jun 2016	81	53	18
FAMASFREENODE	RfA	WP:SNOW	31 May 2016	0	7	0

Archives
2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016
Most recent
221	222	223	224	225	226	227	228	229	230
231	232	233	234	235	236	237	238	239	240
241	242	243	244	245	246	247	248	249	250

 Search
Edit this box
Contents  [hide] 
1	Striking !votes
2	Attrition
3	OLD RFAs
4	Moderator proposal
5	missing request needs to be deleted or closed
Striking !votes[edit]
Is there a guideline regarding when RFA !votes (or comments posted anywhere else where discussion is supposed to take place, e.g. talk pages) should be struck? I ask because I noticed the controversy regarding whether the only oppose at AustralianRupert's current RFA should be struck and the back-and-forth edits that changed it from being struck to unstruck and back again. Everymorning (talk) 14:48, 23 May 2016 (UTC)

WP RFAV Voting Oppose If you want your vote to be taken seriously by the rest of the community and counted by the closing Bureaucrat, you should qualify your reasons by including diffs of evidence you present. Don't take the candidate's previous actions or comments elsewhere out of context, and do be sure of your facts. If a vote does not make sense, all it will do is make the voter look silly. In some cases, entirely inappropriate votes or comments might be indented or even removed by other editors in good standing - they will certainly be discounted by the closer.  Maile (talk) 15:55, 23 May 2016 (UTC)
That is an essay. Kingsindian ? ? 17:52, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
I would advise against it. It isn't going to matter to the outcome, individual statistics are irrelevant, and you only create a martyr.--Wehwalt (talk) 17:30, 23 May 2016 (UTC)
On the other hand, leaving this kind of "vote" on gives the impression that a) such behaviour is OK and b) that RfA is a free-for-all hellhole. Perceptions matter, after all.Jo-Jo Eumerus (talk, contributions) 17:53, 23 May 2016 (UTC)
That's an abstraction. We already know that striking the vote causes sufficient drama today. If someone had simply responded to that oppose with something like "well, that seems irrelevant and childish" and we moved on, would someone else have said "Oppose per AustralianRupert"? If so, then I'd suggest the two or more should both be struck but leaving the one alone may, in retrospect, have been moved things along instead. -- Ricky81682 (talk) 17:59, 23 May 2016 (UTC)
Expanding on this, leave it alone. I think the continuing AustralianRupert RFA drama is showing that doing anything just encourages more antics and creates an drain of commentary that isn't needed. It's bad enough people are opposed for what they do, now we're seeing oppose for what they don't do. -- Ricky81682 (talk) 07:52, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone Can we please just leave oppose !votes alone? When you see something on this project that you don't like, don't inflate the drama by arguing and striking it out. Just ignore it and move on. There is no reason anyone should be getting upset here. 'Crats aren't stupid. We do not need to react so aggressively with each perceived slight. I get that we want RfA to be a friendlier place to the candidates and our current mindset is that hollow oppose !votes contribute to the hostility there. But let me throw another idea out there: the reaction to oppose !votes also contributes to the hostility. When you see it, have your frustrated feelings but then do an Elsa and let it go.--v/r - TP 01:40, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
WP:DENY is mightier than the strike. Leave it for bureaucrats to strike or ignore, or for uninvolved admins to block. Esquivalience t 01:46, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone They carry no weight. It is not a huge problem at RfA. We get one or two here and there. If leaving them encourages others and we get swamped with these, we should deal with that then. Silencing disagreeable viewpoints is a slippery slope and there should be a very important reason to do so. Anna Frodesiak (talk) 02:02, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone - Crats are smart enough to separate the wheat from the chaff. If they are trolling, you are just feeding them, and getting into a revert fest is more disruptive than just leaving them alone. If they are full of lies or intentionally misleading, you can always post at WP:BN and ask them to remove it. And telling someone they should explain more when they are obviously trolling is truly feeding the trolls. As an aside, it does make it look like you are badgering opposing votes when you fight over them, which isn't good and has been legitimately complained about before. Dennis Brown - 2 02:40, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone. I think the only !votes that need to be removed are those of IPs, of socks and those that are so obviously disruptive as to be immediately blockable. All the others are better left in place, even if they are completely boneheaded and WP:DICK-ish, as the original oppose by Engleham was. Such opposes carry no weight will be disregarded by the closing 'crats, and they do not generate follow-up opposes. As noted above, removing them only results in creating martyrs and can in fact produce the kind of drama where there will some RfA participants who take out their frustration on the candidate. That's basically what's happened in AustralianRupert's RfA with the opposes by Basement12 and Quixotic Potato. It is unlikely that these opposes would have ever materialized if the original oppose by Engleham was allowed to stand, but its discussion was moved to the RfA's talkpage. Nsk92 (talk) 03:41, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave Echoing many above - unless blatantly disruptive (which should also be redacted), or lacking suffrage (e.g. socks, anons) - there is little to be gained by this. Extended threaded discussions on if a vote is disruptive or a sock should be moved to the talk page as well.  xaosflux Talk 04:06, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone crats know enough, that's what they were elected for. Omni Flames let's talk about it 09:41, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone, per all the good comments here: 'crats will know what is a valid oppose and what isn't. No comments on the back-and-forth on this particular situation, but not too many of those involved are coming out of it well. AR was wise enough not to get dragged down into it. - SchroCat (talk) 09:49, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone and trout those that do the striking. If there is an urge to say something about the oppose, then have a threaded talk or take it to the talk page. Some of this was discussed at a reform AFC. Graeme Bartlett (talk) 10:00, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
I will add that most of the votes that have been struck or redacted really are quite harmless. They are obviously silly, and reasoning weak. However because of their obviousness they can stay, other votors will not be swayed, and the crats can sort out the issue and lack of strength at closing. If there are really offensive or personal attack remarks, they should be redacted, not merely struck off. Graeme Bartlett (talk) 13:16, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
Comment: I disagree very strongly with most of the comments above and find them inconsistent with prior discussions on related issues. There are times when grossly inappropriate votes and comments should indeed be struck out of the tally. One example occurred last month (see Wikipedia talk:Requests for adminship/Maile66#Georgie1995's oppose) in which a one-day-old account opposed an RfA that was passing by a wide margin on the ground of "Because I felt like being different...." I concluded that this was trollish on its face and struck it and no one expressed disagreement with me. Yesterday, an editor cast an oppose !vote whose rationale was so unreasonable and frivolous ("Universal adulation always suggests there's bodies rotting somewhere, and with a vote count that Kim Jong-il might envy, I'll vote nay just to tip a cold bucket of reality over the bedazzled mob, and keep Rupert on his toes. I shan't believe the dingo did it") that I joined with several other editors in striking it out as well. When asked for an explanation, the editor's subsequent comments were even less acceptable, as I've explained to him here. In this sort of extreme situation (and only then), I consider it appropriate and in fact imperative to disallow and discourage this sort of damaging, counterproductive participation in what is already sometimes a difficult and negative-laden process. Newyorkbrad (talk) 17:29, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
@Newyorkbrad: The drama that unfolded as a result of striking this vote added 10x more toxicity to that discussion than the original oppose !vote. I'm not opposed to striking !votes 100% of the time, but I think when it's obvious that it's going to ignite more arguments, that we need to step away. Is not the whole point to remove the toxic element from RfA? Are we not working against ourselves by getting into an edit war over it? Sometimes it's better to just let things be.--v/r - TP 21:00, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
I would say reverting the striking was the source of the continuing drama. Trolls are reverted and ignored often, the drama comes when someone decides to feed them. HighInBC 21:03, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
(edit conflict) I have a very serious problem with the idea of leaving the sorts of comments at issue in this instance on an active RfA page. If people know that such comments won't be entertained, the goal is that they won't make them. And the people who fought so hard to keep the transparently insincere oppose vote in place contributed more to the problem than those who sought to keep the RfA page as a place where candidates are treated respectfully. Newyorkbrad (talk) 21:07, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Then the topic of "But you didn't strike uncommented support votes" comes up. A non-commented vote is the least of our worries. We all know it will get thrown out. That is the very type of vote people need to just leave alone because it IS trolling, and striking or reverting striking, (rinse, repeat) is just feeding the trolls. There is nothing automatically disruptive in a blank vote except the reaction to it. There isn't anything of value in it either, but we have selected Crats to decide those issues. Going vigilante on blank voters is asking for drama when it is so easy to ignore. Blank votes just aren't a good hill to die on. Dennis Brown - 2 21:38, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Blank !votes are a different issues from !votes with palpably absurd rationales. A strict parallelism between supports and opposes is also not apt (as a trivial example of this, for awhile I attempted to lighten the mood at RfA by casting all of my support !votes in rhyme, and people seem to have enjoyed it, but if I'd written opposes that way I would have been roundly criticized and rightly so). I am becoming very sad that people seem so willing to leave the RfA experiences of our future administrator colleagues sullied with the kinds of comments that have been struck out in the past but which some of you would be willing to see remain in the future. The two examples I've cited on this page are hardly the worst examples of such things, either, believe me. Newyorkbrad (talk) 21:48, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
@Newyorkbrad: I'd appreciate it if you didn't paint those opposing your position as uncaring. That's a broad stroke of the brush you've just made and I feel like it is intended to silence the rest of us. Just because you hold a different idea of the solution doesn't mean that we don't all know what the problem is.
In my opinion, there is more harm, stress, and toxicity added to the candidate's plate by the edit waring and the constant back and forth than there would be had the comments been ignored. You can put the blame for that wherever you want, but it doesn't change the outcome. In my opinion, those capable of taking the higher road should take the higher road.--v/r - TP 21:53, 24 May 2016 (UTC)

Leaving !votes alone: is both good policy and would have resulted in 99% less drama. Assuming that the vote was indeed trolling, it makes no sense to strike it and thus feed the troll. If it was not trolling, then of course it should not have been stricken. Kingsindian ? ? 17:52, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Be bold but not reckless I agree with Newyorkbrad, sometimes it's useful and can be useful. Sometimes it's not and can be disruptive. Like everything, it can be abused or cause trouble. I don't really understand why this is becoming such a big deal. We shouldn't tie hands as if things are black and white all the time. We have enough experienced users watching these pages to make reasonable decisions most of the time this would be an issue (current circumstances not withstanding). Wugapodes [th?k] [kant???bz] 19:46, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Let uninvolved people decide Clearly I am in the minority on this. Frankly I think this whole thing is due to our past permissiveness of disruption here. This recent issue probably would have gone over better if the striking/reverting was not done by people involved in the debate. HighInBC 21:04, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
I would prefer if such votes were kept throughout the RfA, but then discounted in the final tally by the closing crat(s) if they have absolutely no bearing on the candidate's suitability for adminship. I agree with TParis above, that the discussions over those votes caused far more drama than the votes themselves. Ajraddatz (talk) 21:28, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone - I to a point think they should be struck however as noted above the crats aren't stupid - They know what's legit & trolling etc so striking & edit warring is pointless, Anywho leave them alone. CDavey2010Talk 21:42, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Comment. I thought the original question posed by Everymorning was not what should have been done in the Rupert drama, but are there any guidelines generally. I think the answer to that is no, but I could be wrong as I don't participate in many of these discussions. I've always wondered, though, why the 'crats don't take a more active role in enforcing some semblance of order at RfAs. Instead, at the risk of giving offense, they seem to remain aloof and above it all as if to maintain their neutrality, the only thing they can do is decide the outcome.--Bbb23 (talk) 22:16, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Clerking This was widely discussed at WP:RFA2015. I don't believe the issue here is whether the crats are smart enough to know which !votes to weight. The issue here is that some !votes clearly need to be removed not for the purposes of the tally, but because they are disruptive and invite further drama. Mkdwtalk 23:17, 24 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone. The drama that striking entails is more disruptive than the absurd oppose itself. It lengthens and complicates following the RfA unnecessarily; that is, increases noise over signal. People (and bureaucrats in particular) are able to spot ridiculous opposes and weigh them as such. This is why it's called a !vote: it's the strength of arguments that count. Having an open process means allowing a wide-range of opinions from the good to the bad. So unless the oppose is really really offensive and disruptive and breaks our behavioral guidelines, just leave it as is. Jason Quinn (talk) 05:55, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone as per the excellent comments of Dennis Brown. CassiantoTalk 08:04, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
Unless you are a crat, vetted, in part, for the purpose of discounting some RFA votes, do not strike or hat; simply add your own comment to the thread if you must. I would not be against the early hatting of a vote if it is done by a crat; requests can be made at Wikipedia:Bureaucrats'_noticeboard if particularly egregious but leave the redacting to them.--John Cline (talk) 08:51, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
I'm keen that the occasional personal attack votes are simply removed. But clearly that needs to be done with due discretion. ?ereSpielChequers 11:39, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
"The occasional personal attack votes" are one issue but another, as reflected in the two examples I gave above, are ridiculous comments that are labeled as oppose !votes but that don't really express meaningful opposition to the candidate at all (e.g. "oppose because everyone else is supporting and I feel like being different, even though the candidate is actually great"). This sort of trolling is not a serious contribution to the RfA process and those comments do not belong in the "oppose !votes" section of an RfA because they are not actually oppose !votes. The bottom is line is that when I removed them both they stayed removed (the first instance with no controversy at all) and that was entirely the proper outcome. I am concerned that this thread is going to be cited as a precedent for allowing any and every sort of stray piece of idiocy to remain on the section of the RfA pages meant for sincere opposes to candidates' becoming administrators, and I am wondering if there is a place we can take this discussion for broader input because I do not believe that is an outcome we can live with. Newyorkbrad (talk) 14:31, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
Newyorkbrad, They stayed removed because you are an ex-Arb and people are less likely to revert you, don't fool yourself into thinking you are Mr. Ordinary in that respect; you aren't. Comparing your ability to make an action stick versus a non-admin or admin is foolish and misleading. If an experienced non-admin had done that, the likelihood of it turning into a revert-fest would have been much higher. This is why I have consistently said that Crats need to be the ones that remove votes. They have been granted by the community the power to be the sole determiners of what is and isn't "a vote" at RFA, outside of vandalism or some other clear policy violation that requires administrative interference. Dennis Brown - 2 15:55, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
I haven't wanted to say it, because we're all volunteers and we all have busy lives and other things to do ... but the 'crats have been conspicuously not around this discussion, either on the RfA or here. Worth pinging BN and asking some to chime in? Newyorkbrad (talk) 15:58, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
Sure. For a while, they were policing RFA, not sure why they stopped. In general, Crats are rather reclusive creatures, not prone to get involved unless they have to. Generally, this is a good thing, but the question remains "how involved should they be at RFA?". This was part of my point about authority, any removal must be done with enough authority that it will stick unless there is a very good reason it shouldn't. Most generic admin lack that authority at RFA, where it could be seen as "protecting our own". Dennis Brown - 2 16:09, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
Restore. If another editor in good standing deems it appropriate for an oppose vote to count, it probably is a valid opinion. This is a discussion-vote, not an article. Edit-warring is pointless and simply enhances the legitimacy of the original concern. Deryck C. 11:48, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
More comment. I agree conceptually with Newyorkbrad, but, as I tried to state earlier, I have trouble with how a removal is decided. Should we have a policy on the issue? A guideline? How would it be enforced? What if editors disagree with the interpretation? This is why I think it should be the 'crats' responsibility to remove votes. I'm not talking about what weight to give the votes. I'm talking about removal. If a 'crat doesn't remove a vote, any editor can request it outside the RfA. Then, if the 'crats don't remove the vote, like it or not, it stays. This, of course, doesn't apply to sock votes or blatant vandalism.--Bbb23 (talk) 14:47, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone: echoing entirely Dennis Brown. Just let sleeping dogs lie. Sheesh. Fylbecatulous talk 15:35, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
So, as the actual most recent example, if someone posts an oppose !vote like the one we saw earlier this week"Universal adulation always suggests there's bodies rotting somewhere, and with a vote count that Kim Jong-il might envy, I'll vote nay just to tip a cold bucket of reality over the bedazzled mob, and keep [the candidate] on his toes. I shan't believe the dingo did it", we should just leave it there for the next 100 visitors to the RfA page to have to encounter as they review the page? And as I said earlier, that's far from the worst such comment that I've seen quite properly removed from an RfA page. The outcome some are advocating herethat nothing called a !vote should ever be struck or removedis not fair to the candidate, it's not fair to the other readers of the page, and it's not fair to the process. Newyorkbrad (talk) 15:44, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
I agree with HighInBC's comment that "reverting the striking was the source of the continuing drama." Indeed I would credit that act with the 10 fold increase in drama too. Our only recourse when the post doesn't qualify for revision deletion or suppression is to IAR and remove it; Ive done it myself in the past. The problem is that when a colleague restores the removal, the comment is treated as sacrosanct and no recourse is in place to reinstate the removal. That's where we should be able to request a bureaucrat to reinstate the removal and I don't see why we couldn't do this right now. In my opinion, a huge contributing factor is that any visible comment present at an RFA's close will almost certainly remain visible all the way unto the archiving of the page; whether counted or not by the crat. I think the closing crat's need to take action before archiving an RFA, and actually redact certain comments given no weight, and or identify comments given reduced weight with rationale; so we not only know it can happen but also that we can see examples where it has. In my opinion the damage an aspersion can do when left to view for 7 days is much, much less than the damage that aspersion can do as a permanent part of the archive. I believe far too many comments that should have been discounted and removed remain visible in the archive and that really needs to stop happening; if nothing else improves, crats should see to fixing this; I believe. Aside this, I think you would be an excellent candidate for RfB and I'd love a chance to support you for such a position.--John Cline (talk) 17:14, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
In my opinion, such drivel and troll votes should be removed or struck and the author immediately topic banned from further participation in RfA. To allow such nonsense to stand makes a mockery of all the efforts that have been made over the years to get RfA finally cleaned up in an attempt to make the debate for adminship a more pleasant venue for the potential candidates of the right calibre who are not coming forward for that very reason. How many more times do I have to utter my worn out mantra 'fix the voters and RfA will fix itself' before the penny drops?Kudpung ??????? (talk) 16:07, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone per WP:AGF and WP:RFA which states, "Always be respectful towards others..." Andrew D. (talk) 17:08, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone per DennisBrown and Andrew Davidson above per WP:AGF and WP:RFA .Unless it violated WP:NPA or WP:OUTING it need be removed by anyone.But if there any other issue it can be raised to the Crats and feel only a Crat should remove if all one needs to be removed.Pharaoh of the Wizards (talk) 18:09, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
We've empowered the crats to clerk RfA, right? IMO this falls entirely under clerking, so it should be left to the crats; if none are around send a ping to WP:BN or the user talk pages of the more active ones maybe. That said, I agree firmly with Kudpung that these nonsense votes were unacceptable, they created ridiculous drama and generated other opposes based on that drama, even when it had nothing to do with the candidate. What does that say about the process? ansh666 18:16, 26 May 2016 (UTC)
 Bureaucrat note: (commenting per request) Seems to me that consensus is very clearly "Leave it alone". Sounds good to me. y    Talk to Nihonjoe  Join WP Japan! 01:09, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
@Nihonjoe: I'd appreciate if you and other 'crats could address some of the specific points I've made above, because I think people are seriously underrating the disastrous situation that will ensue if "nothing on an RfA that begins with a numeral (signifying a !vote) can ever be touched" becomes policy. Newyorkbrad (talk) 01:32, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
@Newyorkbrad: Please summarize your points down here. It will make it easier to address them. Thanks. y    Talk to Nihonjoe  Join WP Japan! 01:39, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
Well, rather than repeat everything I've already said, maybe we should start by clarifying the consensus you think has emerged. Is it that "nothing calling itself an RfA !vote can ever be removed or stricken"? That can't be right, and if need be, tomorrow I can round up some examples of comments from real RfA's that I doubt anyone would actually want to have left in place. Or is it "removing or striking votes can create ill-feelings if done without good cause, so we have to be careful"? That would lead to potentially a much more sensible discussion of how we draw the line, and specifically, whether mock-oppose !votes that aren't really opposes (e.g., "oppose just because I feel like being different today", as in the two recent examples I've cited above) cross it, especially in the context of the efforts to make RfA a less negative and fraught process. Newyorkbrad (talk) 02:04, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
I lean toward the "removing or striking votes can create ill-feelings if done without good cause, so we have to be careful" interpretation. That seems to be my impression from reading the above. I also agree with Wizardman, in that we don't have a lot on our plates lately, so it may be better to leave a note on WP:BN and let us review it in cases where it's not blatant. y    Talk to Nihonjoe  Join WP Japan! 02:20, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
If a vote is clearly trolling and disruptive, then per the above, as a bureaucrat yes i'm going to strike it. If thre's a semblance of good faith, then this entire topic is moot anyway and not applicable as of course it would stay up. Keeping it intact is what feeds the trolls, not the other way around. What causes most of the drama isn't the striking act itself, it's people jumping in and adding fuel to the fire on both sides. The crats have virtually nothing on our plate, we can keep an eye on RFAs. Wizardman 02:12, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
I don't think any !vote should be struck/redacted, except
(1) per explicit overriding policy (Wikipedia:Banning policy, Wikipedia:No personal attacks or Wikipedia:Biographies of living persons etc);
(2) by the editor who posted it
(3) By a bureaucrat qualified to close the RfA, however
bureaucrats should refrain from striking or placing other close-impacting annotation until the RfA is being closed.
--SmokeyJoe (talk) 02:17, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
RfA is not a special place that is subject to special rules. Nor should it be. It operates subject to the usual Wikipedia norms. Comments made in bad faith should be struck/removed by any uninvolved admin. If someone objects to such an action, don't repeat your action - have a discussion and try to reach a consensus. If you can't, ask a crat to step in or leave it for one to sort it out when they close the discussion. Most of the issues being discussed here apply to any post anywhere on the project that you regard to be trolling - feel free to take action in obvious cases, but you may inadvertently throw fuel on the fire by doing so, so sometimes it pays to just ignore it and move on. WJBscribe (talk) 12:44, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
I agree with much of what you said, especially as to the merits of leaving things alone, but when it comes to the status of RfA, I disagree. That might be the situation if the community had not had a Request for Comment on this topic, but it did, and it said crats are empowered to clerk RfAs. It did not empower anyone else to do so. As we lawyers say, expressio unius est exclusion alterius (the inclusion of one means the exclusion of the other), that is, the community, by choosing bureaucrats to clerk, decided that that non-bureaucrats should not clerk (excepting the overriding exceptions mentioned above). Thus, administrators and other editors should not strike or threaten to personally strike !votes, questions, answers, comments, and other matters, but should, if they it necessary, post at WP:BN as the proper course of action. But before that, a private email, especially when an established editor is involved, might be a lot smarter in defusing a situation before it starts, and avoiding lasting hard feelings. Just my two cents.--Wehwalt (talk) 13:15, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
That follows if you see striking/removing bad faith comments as "clerking". I don't. Striking/removing trolling is a response to a user conduct issue. Generally - although we can deal with user conduct because we are all admins - bureaucrats have no special role when it comes to user conduct. WJBscribe (talk) 13:32, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
Removal of comments deemed disruptive seems well within the ambit of what people wanted clerks to do at the RFC. Might be the bulk of what they did actually, deal with comments that caused a fuss.--Wehwalt (talk) 17:16, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
Take consensus on this page before striking out any non-vandal/sock/attack !vote on an active RfA I believe that if consensus is believed to be the prominent guiding force, then no RfA !vote (except of course, clear vandalism and similar cases), however silly, should be struck arbitrarily by any editor, leave alone an administrator or bureaucrat, unless there is consensus on this page to do so. I don't know if such a policy/guideline exists already. If it doesn't, there should perhaps be a best practice guideline where this point may be added if others agree. Xender Lourdes (talk) 15:47, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
That proposed approach would maximize the disruption caused by trolling and the attention given to it, and with due respect, is certainly not tenable. Newyorkbrad (talk) 15:49, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
And on the other hand, it would allow editors to not take it unto their own hands to decide whether an oppose is trolling or not. I am not referring to you, as you are one of the most supportive editors around who at the very least ensures that editors applying for administration are protected. I am referring to editors who might cut out oppose votes simply because they don't like it. A restriction of taking consensus would ensure that only those editors who really feel strongly about an oppose would reach out to the community here to take consensus. Thanks. Xender Lourdes (talk) 15:55, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
Xender, in theory I understand the concern you are raising and it is a reasonable one. But in practice, I can't believe that the problem you are suggestingpeople arbitrarily redacting or removing things from RfA pages without a legitimate reasonhas ever actually occurred. Certainly I can't think of many, or any, examples, which is partly because when these situations arise, someone clueful steps in and addresses it. This week's situation was unusual and typically these things are handled without a lot of fuss; this may be one of those issues on which the last thing we need are more rules. Newyorkbrad (talk) 16:02, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
I understand what you are saying. I've seen that this is an evolving project. Instances like this provide clarity on certain issues which can be quite disheartening to contributing editors who have spent considerable effort on bettering Wikipedia. I am new on the RFA page and my oppose was the first one based on my understanding of Rupert's contributions. I would believe that even if I had disagreed with AustralianRupert's answers, given the trend in this Rfa, someone might have struck out my oppose, claiming the answers are correct. I reiterate my opinion, which I feel seems to thankfully be the opinion of a majority of editors here, that one should leave them alone (the opposes) even if they are silly (except the attack and vandal opposes I mentioned) unless there is consensus here or on the Rfa talk page to do otherwise. At the same time, I do agree with all that you're saying because each case can be so different. Xender Lourdes (talk) 01:19, 28 May 2016 (UTC)
I will say again that we are not talking about opposition to the candidate based on any sort of stated, non-trollish reason relating to his or her Wikipedia editing or experience. In the case of the last two !votes I struck (and which I emphasize again stayed struck), the "opposes" candidly stated that there was no reason for opposing at all, in fact that the !voters weren't actually opposed to the candidate's gaining adminship, but were just playing games. If I spend a year or two or more editing Wikipedia and then volunteer for adminship, and to subject myself to the weeklong RfA process in which I am subject to all sorts of criticism (some fair and some unfair), I think the very least I would expect is that people not be listed as opposing my adminship who don't even actually oppose it. We are not talking about mere disagreement with a vote, we are talking about obvious trolling and game-playing. (In the case of your initial opposition to AustralianRupert, no one would treat your doubting the candidate's familiarity with policy as an illegitimate reason for opposing. Personally, I think it would be better practice to ask the candidate your question and then !vote based on the answer, rather than cast an oppose !vote "but I'll change to support if the answer is good", only because the way you did it clutters up the page. But that is just an individual suggestion and has nothing to do with deprecating votes.) Newyorkbrad (talk) 01:45, 28 May 2016 (UTC)
What about addressing the issue of trolls by semi-protecting RFAs? With regard to the issue of striking, I suspect that reverting inappropriate/pointy edits to RFAs is better than striking them out, as in that case the disruptive edit is no longer visible on the page. Everymorning (talk) 19:36, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
None of the recent RfA drama has been caused by anyone isn't autoconfirmed (or even extended-confirmed). ansh666 20:35, 27 May 2016 (UTC)
There would need to be high minimum requirements for RfA votes if we were to stop all trolls. A better solution would be to simply hand out blocks to editors who think that RfA is an unsupervised virtual playground. Trolling is vandalism and should be handled as such; it is peculiar that trolling and disruption by editors with one-page block logs is tolerated. Esquivalience t 01:10, 28 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave it, with the intention that bureaucrats will do exactly what they were selected for and weigh votes appropriately. ~ RobTalk 01:23, 28 May 2016 (UTC)
The issue is not the weighing of votes, or the outcome of an RfA. I can't remember an RfA that was actually closed the wrong way' due to the sort of trolling we are discussing, in the history of the project. The issue is whether blatantly trollish, or offensive, or bigoted, or just entirely inane and distracting comments must necessarily remain on the RfA page for the full week of the RfA, thereby damaging the candidate's experience and the RfA process. It is absurd for 200 people who come to an RfA page and scan the votes that have come before them to have to read through an oppose !vote reading, for example, "Oppose. Universal adulation always suggests there's bodies rotting somewhere, and with a vote count that Kim Jong-il might envy, I'll vote nay just to tip a cold bucket of reality over the bedazzled mob, and keep [the candidate] on his toes. I shan't believe the dingo did it"' (taken verbatim, including the bizarrely gratuitous link to an article about the violent death of a baby, from the vote I struck in a current RfA), or an oppose from a one-day-old account explained as "Because I felt like being different...pretty poor reason I know, but so be it..." (from a !vote I struck, with no disagreement, in another RfA three weeks ago). I realize that I am starting to repeat myself here but I do not recall having ever felt more strongly about anything (other than some BLP issues) in my ten years' tenure on this project. I am entirely convinced that if a rule develops that anything goes on the RfA page and nothing can be removed if it starts with a numeral and calls itself a vote, the results are going to be totally disastrous. Newyorkbrad (talk) 01:45, 28 May 2016 (UTC)
@Newyorkbrad: I'm convinced that this is not your finest hour. Give it a rest. No one is making a rule, precedent, or any sort of policy about this. What happened on AusRup's RfA was pure disruption on both sides. It was an attempt to amputate an arm because of a mosquito bite.--v/r - TP 03:40, 28 May 2016 (UTC)
I largely agree with everything you're saying, but in this case, the cure is more painful than the original ill. What's more damaging to the reputation of RfA C a few inane opposes that are drowned out by supporters or a series of arguments over whether to strike an oppose, including edit-warring, a discussion on what the criteria for striking should be, a discussion on whether the oppose vote meets those criteria, etc.? Clearly the latter is more disruptive. I wouldn't necessarily be opposed to allowing bureaucrats to take a more active clerking role and do ArbCom "clerk action"-esque strikes with zero discussion, but having the community do it is very obviously not a reasonable solution. It's akin to giving someone chemotherapy for the common cold. I mean, you've seen what it did to the ongoing RfA. ~ RobTalk 04:09, 28 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave it, bureaucrats were elected for their judgement and they are able to disregard obviously disruptive votes, which they have done since RFA was created. There is no difference now, and I would expect bureaucrats to disregard any low-quality votes, positive or negative, without having said votes stricken by the community. Please let the bureaucrats do the job that they were elected to perform. This pre-striking is against any RFA procedure that I've seen on the project. Poor-quality contributions will be removed, as they have always been, when reviewed by the bcrats. Nakon 03:46, 28 May 2016 (UTC)
Just a nit-picky semantic clarification: bureaucrats are not elected and they don't have a 'job' to do. Jason Quinn (talk) 10:24, 29 May 2016 (UTC)
Redact unambiguously unhelpful !votes. HighInBC is absolutely correct that the recent drama would not have occurred had appropriate redaction not been reverted. Ambiguous cases should be left to the crats, but anyone should feel free to redact the sort of blatantly unconstructive nonsense NewYorkBrad has been quoting to stop it toxifying the atmosphere at RfA. Adrian J. Hunter(talk?contribs) 11:30, 28 May 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone. The reason why the standards at RfB are so high is because we expect bureaucrats to be wise and experienced enough to be able to separate the reasonable opposes from the ridiculous ones. Gizza (t)(c) 02:52, 29 May 2016 (UTC)
Newyorkbrad is RIGHT, showing some consideration for the people behind the editor ID is desirable, and removing / striking grossly objectionable is both reasonable and appropriate. It is not about whether bureaucrats will be swayed, the sense required to discount such things is pretty small and so being concerned about influencing bureaucrats is a red herring. It is about being respectful to RfA candidates by removing gratuitous material. It is about a community behaving collectively as a community and saying that RfA is not a free-for-all brawl. RfA has enough problems without sanctioning more ways to throw shit at people. EdChem (talk) 07:26, 29 May 2016 (UTC)
Thanks for stating this so clearly, EdChem. I'm amazed so many commenters above still think this is about the vote tally. Adrian J. Hunter(talk?contribs) 14:00, 29 May 2016 (UTC)
But there was no brawl until the vote was struck, unstruck, and on and on. We can say that not much sense is required to redact votes, but experience hasn't demonstrated that, where every struck vote results in a threaded argument about whether the strike was appropriate. It's very easy for an RfA candidate to mentally dismiss an oppose for silly reasons like "just to be different". If we really think an RfA candidate can't blow off something as minor as that, then that candidate should be opposed. The struck votes that spawned this argument were, collectively: (a) two blank votes, (b) two votes saying the candidate should have stepped in to stop the other votes from being struck. Any brawl here was the result of striking two blank votes. Wouldn't the problem at that RfA gone away if those two blank votes were left alone? In that alternative scenario, how is that an "all out brawl"? ~ RobTalk 14:15, 29 May 2016 (UTC)
BU Rob13, the !votes that have been mentioned as examples weren't originally blank; they were as I quoted them. And normally, removing such things has historically not produced controversy in most instances; this week's events were unusual. Newyorkbrad (talk) 15:23, 29 May 2016 (UTC)
@Newyorkbrad: Thanks for the correction. I dug through the diffs. NewYorkActuary was originally blank (and he later expanded on it). Engleham's was non-blank and absurd, but it was devoid of content. It was essentially "oppose to be different", and I would expect an RfA candidate to see that, shake his or her head a bit at the absurdity, and move on. Maybe even feel good about themselves that "to be different" was the only thing someone could find to oppose them based on. How does that contribute to a negative environment at RfA more than the clusterfuck that was striking? Even if this week's events were unusual (and I'm not a regular voter at RfA, so I'm not familiar), what is the net positive that justifies the sometimes-huge-sometimes-nonexistent negative? You've called these comments "damaging", but what is the damage a reasonably well-prepared RfA candidate would incur? ~ RobTalk 15:47, 29 May 2016 (UTC)
Thanks for the question. Actually, no one suggested striking NewYorkActuary's vote or comment, because as ill-reasoned as it was (IMHO), it did present a fact-based, rational reason for opposing the candidate. As for Engleham's vote and comments, if you think it's reasonable for the process to include faux-oppositions with references to Kim Jong-il and violent death, then we're going to disagree about that one. The disaster I referenced will occur if and when (as reflected in my question to Nihonjoe) the consensus in this discussion is interpreted not as "think carefully before removing or striking anything from an RfA" but as "nothing should be removed or struck ever" as the material in question this time or last time is far from the worst we've seen. There is a suggestion above that it won't be interpreted that way and I'm overreacting, but I've seen that sort of overreading of a discussion happen several times before. Newyorkbrad (talk) 16:06, 29 May 2016 (UTC)
I agree that the aim should be to minimize disruption. As soon as it was clear that striking the vote did not have near-unanimous support (and thus someone would raise a fuss about it), it is best to not feed the trolls and let it be. Kingsindian ? ? 18:41, 29 May 2016 (UTC)
That is exactly the goal. If the vote is calling them a nazi, of course you revert it out and take admin action if needed, just as you would in any other place on Wikipedia. RFA isn't an exception. But if the reason is blank, or mildly stupid, or if the count is obvious and they are simply mistaken (AGF), go to their talk page if you must, or ping them on the RFA talk page, but keep the threading to a minimum. The key is to minimize drama. That benefits the candidate more than a perfect vote count. Dennis Brown - 2 23:00, 30 May 2016 (UTC)
Discuss first I think striking votes isn't necessarily bad, but in any case where the vote isn't a violation of policy (such as blatant personal attacks etc, which should be deleted), the vote should be responded to to give the voter a chance to justify their reasoning. If this is not satisfactory, the vote should be struck: not for the bureaucrat's sake, but for the sake of other reading the page so they can clearly see that a particular vote is not appropriate.   crh 23 ?(Talk) 15:12, 29 May 2016 (UTC)
Make a damn decision If it's just stupid, ignore it per WP:DNFTT. If it's blatant trolling, just remove it it (e.g. [1],[2]). Ya'll create more drama by visibly striking (or hatting) stuff, which attracts more attention to it than simply WP:AGFing the closing bureaucrat will know "stupid" when they see it without your help. Plus the subsequent bickering over striking it. NE Ent 11:05, 30 May 2016 (UTC)
Never argue with an idiot. They will only bring you down to their level and beat you with experience. Whatever action avoids arguing with an idiot is the right thing to do. Ritchie333 (talk) (cont) 10:07, 1 June 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone Per Dennis Brown and others. (((The Quixotic Potato))) (talk) 12:03, 17 June 2016 (UTC)
Leave them alone. I agree with the excellent comments of NE Ent, Anna Frodesiak, Jason Quinn that frivolous or unexplained rationales will be treated appropriatelythat is, given little or no weightby the bureaucrats, that therefore striking weakly explained/inappropriate/unhelpful votes is unnecessary at best, and causes pointless community consternation and drama at worst. Now, if the comment is a blatant personal attack in violation of the policy against personal attacks (as opposed to a merely a bad rationale), that is another matter altogethersuch attacks can be struck. Neutralitytalk 23:35, 7 July 2016 (UTC)
Result of RfC was that bureaucrats should do the clerking. And I don't see much above which persuades me otherwise. So, essentially: leave them alone. If there is a genuine concern or disruption, just drop a note at WP:BN (per y, et al). - jc37 10:15, 9 July 2016 (UTC)
Attrition[edit]
43 desysoppings for inactivity during 1st half of 2016 for 6 successful candidacies so far this year. Still not yet critical but it looks as if WereSpielChequers' table is going to finish the year with the worst result ever, demonstrating a still alarming downward trend. --Kudpung ??????? (talk) 22:25, 1 July 2016 (UTC)

Inactivity desysoppings and new admins are just two datapoints, you also need to include other desysoppings and crucially resyoppings. There are also likely to be seasonal fluctuations. My preferred metric for the size of the admin cadre is the number of active admins now compared to a year ago. Not ideal, not least because you can be an "active admin" even if you never use the tools, but it is a stat that has been continually and consistently collected over a long period of time. Currently we are down 50, dropping from 590 t0 540 year on year. This is beyond critical for those like me who believe that all longstanding clueful active Wikipedians should be admins when and if they are ready, and should be worrying even to those who think that adminship should become a bigger and bigger deal. I suppose there may be some extreme inclusionists out there who see WP:Pure_wiki deletion_system as the logical response to admin shortages, but I'm not keen. ?ereSpielChequers 20:53, 2 July 2016 (UTC)
I assume you mean "down to 590"?... As to both yours and Kudpung's points, I consider the resyopping numbers so far this year to be particularly abysmal. So it's not just that we're not getting new Admins C we're also not getting back experienced Admins "returning to the fold" like we used to. Suffice it to say, we can't continue going on like this, but I think it will take an actual "crisis" before it'll shake most out of their current stupor. --IJBall (contribs ? talk) 21:46, 2 July 2016 (UTC)
My view of "crisis" would be a pedia more difficult to use, or less reliable. Possibly I've spent too much time at concerts, but my question about such matters is "how does it look from front of house"?--Wehwalt (talk) 01:51, 3 July 2016 (UTC)
@IJBall. No I meant down 50. But I've added ", dropping from 590 t0 540 year on year." ?ereSpielChequers 07:30, 10 July 2016 (UTC)
More data: looking at this, and with half a year of data in, it looks like desysoppings for inactivity will be up roughly about 10% this year over last, while standard Admin resignations are roughly on the same pace. (The only good news is that "desysoppings for cause" look to be way down this year C maybe all the old time-y "bad" admins have already been mostly worked through the system?...) On the other hand, while everyone knows that RfA's are on pace to be off about 40% from last year, resysoppings are off by 50%. That's not good... --IJBall (contribs ? talk) 04:11, 3 July 2016 (UTC)

6 new Admins (expected to be active) is more productive than a 100 non-productive admins desysopped (is that actually a word) for inactivity. The comparison is meaningless since - by definition - one side of the comparison are permanently inactive. Admin productivity should be measured on a demand and supply basis. How many actions are needed. Queues would be an obvious indication. Get over number of RfA approved people - if they do no work they are unproductive. Leaky Caldron 08:11, 3 July 2016 (UTC)
Permanently? Are you sure? ;)
IJBall, where did you find 10 desysoppings last year? Wikipedia:Former_administrators/reason/for_cause makes it look like 6. And yeah, two of those might not have happened this year, but one could easily have happened a day later. And only one was an "old time-y" admin. Beware of statistics of small numbers ;) Opabinia regalis (talk) 00:34, 4 July 2016 (UTC)
@Opabinia regalis: Only 8 of those desysoppings "took" C 2 were quick desysops/resysops after 2 Admins' accounts passwords were hacked (but for the purposes of how I maintain my list, I have to include them in the count C still the two in question can be found via List of resysopped users). Six other desysoppings were "standard for cause(s)", and one more involved an actual Arbcom indef block. I'll admit, that means I'm missing the tenth (and am not sure about my listings for the desysoppings in Feb. & March 2015)... I'll look into this later this evening, and see if I can remember what is up with that. --IJBall (contribs ? talk) 02:05, 4 July 2016 (UTC)
Ah, thanks, I forgot all about that! In any case, I meant to say that these are such small numbers that not much can be learned from year-on-year changes. Opabinia regalis (talk) 05:59, 4 July 2016 (UTC)
OK, it looks like the tenth was Wifone, who technically resigned, but who I'm pretty sure I counted as a "desysop" as it was resignation under a cloud. (That also explains the Feb. 2015 entry.) So I think I've got 2015 all figured out... --IJBall (contribs ? talk) 08:19, 4 July 2016 (UTC)
@IJBall, Opabinia regalis, WereSpielChequers, Wehwalt, and Kudpung: Hi, I just found THIS, which is a great log of sysop numbers in the last 5 years. ?Andy W. (talk??ctb) 22:02, 4 July 2016 (UTC)
But a lot of the work that admins do doesn't change the reader experience very much, done or undone. That is why I do not worry about numbers. The function of administration (including ArbCom, oversight, other functionary) is as an auxiliary to content production, the only thing we make that exits the factory. Administration that doesn't enable that shouldn't be. Thus, to me anyway, unless it is shown that that the number of administrators, of itself, has caused content production or quality to drop, I don't get very excited about it.--Wehwalt (talk) 03:13, 5 July 2016 (UTC)
Re "content production, the only thing" - what about protection of existing content from vandals, POVvers, spammers etc? DexDor (talk) 05:51, 5 July 2016 (UTC)
Protection of content from having it made worse is obviously a goal. No point in building what gets torn down. I said administration needs to be auxiliary to content, I did not say that "writing is the only important thing" which would not be true because writing is nothing without a place to put it where it can be cherished and protected. Plainly anti-vandalism is part of that. But such things as closing AfD, certain queues that are said to be backlogged, do not significantly affect the view from front of house, which I consider a major metric.--Wehwalt (talk) 06:16, 5 July 2016 (UTC)
Wifione s indeff blocked and banned by Arbcom. I guess that technically counts as desysping 'for cause' Kudpung ??????? (talk) 22:20, 4 July 2016 (UTC)
OLD RFAs[edit]
Now I am not opposing the Oppose votes who always complain that, "the candidate is not ready", "The candidate has only one year old account", "the candidate is not active in fighting vandalism", "the candidate has not done enough content creation", "the candidate has never voted in AFDs" . Actually I support these comments.

But if we look at the edit count of some of our Administrators as KaisaL which stands at 7,571 which is much lower than BuRob13, Anarchyte, Thine Antique Pen, Oshwah, MontanaBw, APerson.

A former administrator Pepsidrinka has only 5,844 edits. Just imagine how many edits he had when he passed RFA. Yes he was a sysop

These administrators had easy RFAs:

19 support votes Wikipedia:Requests for adminship/Utcursch

See how easily they became administrator

182.66.9.177 (talk) 13:40, 5 July 2016 (UTC)

@182.66.9.177: that was Then. This is Now. VegasCasinoKid (talk) 07:02, 10 July 2016 (UTC)
It is a well known fact that there has been a constant inflation of adminship minimum requirements over the years. Is there a point you're trying to make besides that?--Atlan (talk) 14:00, 5 July 2016 (UTC)
I think this demonstrates that selecting people without a huge amount of edits/time served is not going to cause the sky to fall. Many of our current admins got their bit with a lot less of a gauntlet and it turned out fine. I don't think we actually need 2 years and 40k+ edits to evaluate if a person has a good temperament and an understanding of policy. HighInBC Need help? {{ping|HighInBC}} 14:28, 5 July 2016 (UTC)
I concur. There's no correlation that I'm aware of that shows a link between the number of edits or tenure someone has and their ability to be an administrator. Yet, standards keep rising, and people keep on layering in insane requirements that have no correlative basis in reality. We've had seven successful RfAs this year. The average edit count of six of those (removing Widr as an outlier; ~200k at time of RfA) candidates at the time of their RfA is right about 40k edits. The average tenure in the same set is seven years.
Running some rough numbers; assuming 10k edits as a bottom for a potential RfA candidate, there are 7,329 editors with at least 10k edits. Of those, approximately 58% are active, leaving 4,250 candidates. Of those, approximately 1,075 are already administrators, leaving 3,175 potential candidates. This number may include a significant number of former administrators. So, there's somewhere around 3,000 potential candidates. --Hammersoft (talk) 15:32, 5 July 2016 (UTC)
There are no 'present day' standards. The small but influential core of regular voters have been using their same criteria for years. What you have is this transient set of hundreds of one-off voters, especially now that the community decided to advertise RfA very widely, who think it's cool to ask for ridiculous standards that they just apply willy-nilly without any clue of what RfA is all about, and newbies who ask racist and disingenuous questions, and editors who suffer from systemic bias trying to trip he candidate up over over LGBT, Gender Gap, or oher socio-political issues. Like I keep saying, fix the voters and RfA will fix itself. And just illustrate a point: this vote by a blatant troll.Kudpung ??????? (talk) 04:07, 8 July 2016 (UTC)
Plus, RFA is also fair game to go yell and criticize people for voting against them in whatever thing they wanted to. A decade ago, tools didn't exist so it would be difficult to check interactions between yourself and the candidate. Now, people first check if they interacted with that person (fair point) and then if there was any chance of a disagreement, it's simple to oppose and cry about things that could go wrong. No one can see the lost opportunity cost of someone not becoming an admin at that time (a lot of the opposes now are "do it again later"). Even then, I doubt anyone could point to the worst of the worst admins having any long-term impact here that basically doesn't wash off over a year or so. Other than the people who rant about admin abuse because their COI get deleted or they are told to watch policies and get blocked, there's no single admin running around doing enough to cause that kind of damage people freak out about. It's not even like there's admin willy nilly being abusive with AFD closings which was the real concern at the start of the project, DRV is pretty thorough and any admin can restore it for a draft. -- Ricky81682 (talk) 02:44, 10 July 2016 (UTC)
The one long-lasting effect an admin can have on Wikipedia is to make other productive editors lose interest in the project and then either edit less or retire completely. Apart from that, most damage is short-term. Gizza (t)(c) 04:37, 10 July 2016 (UTC)
Agreed but it's rarely the actual admin tools that cause that nowadays to me. Well, I admit blocks are obvious but you can see ANI right now and rarely does it actually involve admins or in particular admin tools, generally just editors who have been around for a while and know what to do, regardless of their technical status. The excessively murky set of "policies and guidelines" we've developed are intimidating to new editors. - Ricky81682 (talk) 06:36, 10 July 2016 (UTC)
You'r partly right Ricky81682, but actually the real reason for 'rarely does it actually involve admins or in particular admin tools, generally just editors who have been around for a while and know what to do', is because admins are sick and tired of the threats and abuse they get from just doing their job there. Being a front-line admin is no picnic. It's a shame, because not all those non-admins know what they are doing, and there is often too much background noise from the peanut gallery; you can see this from the speed at which an ANI gets turned into a support/oppose poll for someone's (non-admit) proposal for a block. Kudpung ??????? (talk) 10:45, 10 July 2016 (UTC)
Yes, and those kinds of Admins are rarely desysopped at Arbcom, or anywhere else. Quite the opposite in fact C it's pretty clear that there is no "upside" to complaining about that kind of abuse: nothing will happen to the Admin in question, and it's likely that the complainant will be driven off the project instead. --IJBall (contribs ? talk) 20:29, 10 July 2016 (UTC)
That's correct, and it is the underlying reason for the reluctance to elevate users and the general difficulties associated with the process. Coretheapple (talk) 22:45, 10 July 2016 (UTC)
Moderator proposal[edit]
Wikipedia:Moderators/Proposal
A Request for Comment on a proposal to create a new user group with an abbreviated set of administrator user-rights, as an option for editors to request instead of requesting the entire sysop user-right package. I welcome everyone's thoughts on this. - jc37 21:14, 8 July 2016 (UTC)

Please see Wikipedia:Perennial_proposals#Hierarchical_structures. --Hammersoft (talk) 23:22, 9 July 2016 (UTC)
Seen already. This is not a hierarchical structure no matter how you may wish to paint it as such.
This is merely a package of content-related user-rights. - jc37 23:27, 9 July 2016 (UTC)
From PEREN: "There should be some kind of 'partial admin' that gets certain admin powers, but not all of them"
From your proposal: "(a) package ... designed primarily to allow editors the option to help with content-related admin tasks ... if they wish to not have the rest of the sysop package of user-rights"
I fail to see the difference. Both describe a subset of the entire administrator privileges package. Regardless, I'm not trying to paint anything here, even if there is a strong similarity. My point is that if your proposal is to pass (and right now it's badly failing), you need to address the concerns that have been repeatedly raised before when very similar proposals have been made. The arguments in opposition to the PEREN proposals track with the arguments being used to oppose your proposal. It would be a good idea to suspend the failing RfC, and focus on fixing your proposal to address those concerns. Several of the oppose votes are raising issues with your proposal that are issues noted at PEREN. I'm not trying to shoot you down here. Rather, you need to rethink this some. The RfC is a little over a day old and already it's at least 26 votes in the hole. There's reasons for that. --Hammersoft (talk) 01:08, 10 July 2016 (UTC)
Jc, you say you're assuming that the Foundation's position on the subject hasn't changed in 4 years, without checking. That turns out to be wrong; this is their current position (a permalink to the current version of WP:VPR). - Dank (push to talk) 15:06, 10 July 2016 (UTC)
missing request needs to be deleted or closed[edit]
There is a request for adminship which has not made it onto the page: Wikipedia:Requests for adminship/ZigZagoon99. I'm not sure if it's because it was malformed or if it just wasn't done properly. We should either delete is as vandalism or put it on the request page so we can snow close it. Meters (talk) 05:56, 18 July 2016 (UTC)

It appears to already be deleted. y    Talk to Nihonjoe  Join WP Japan! 17:18, 18 July 2016 (UTC)
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inProject pageTalkReadEditNew sectionView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
Languages
This page was last modified on 25 July 2016, at 01:42.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
Mary Hanford Ford
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Mary Hanford Ford
Mary H. Ford, circa 1898.png
Mary H. Ford, circa 1898, 42 years old
Born	November 1, 1856
Meadville, Pennsylvania
Died	February 2, 1937 (aged 80)
Clearwater, Florida
Nationality	American
Other names	Mary H. Ford, Mary Ford, Mary Hanford Finney Ford, Minnie Finnie
Known for	lecturer, author, art and literature critic and a leader in the women's suffrage movement
Notable work	Which Wins?, Message of the Mystics trilogy, The Oriental Rose
Religion	philosophically non-religious
until she became a Spiritist, 1885-1901, and then a Bah' 1901C1937
Spouse(s)	Moses Smith Ford
Children	Roland, Lynette, Gareth
Mary Hanford Ford (November 1, 1856 C February 2, 1937) was an American lecturer, author, art and literature critic and a leader in the women's suffrage movement. She reached early notoriety in Kansas at the age of 28 and soon left for the Chicago World's Fair. She was taken up by the society ladies of the Chicago area who, impressed with her talks on art and literature at the Fair, helped launch her on a new career, initially in Chicago and then across some States. Along the way she was already published in articles and noticed in suffrage meetings. In addition to work as an art critic and speaker she wrote a number of books, most prominently a trilogy Message of the Mystics. Circa 1900-1902 Ford found the Bah' Faith through Sarah Farmer, Green Acre, and Mirza Abu'l-Fadl, and helped form the first community of Bah's in Boston where Louis Bourgeois, future architect of the first Bah' House of Worship in the West, then joined the religion. In 1907 Ford went on Bah' pilgrimage, in 1910 she started writing Bah' books such as The Oriental Rose, and traveled with `Abdu'l-Bah during some of his journeys in various places in Europe and then America. Ford spent the years of World War I in California following the first Bah' International Congress at the PanamaCPacific International Exposition, and then moved back to New York where she spent almost the next 20 years. In this period she was censored off a radio broadcast, helped develop the religion's community both in meetings she supported and literary efforts, and traveled in Europe for the religion, before reducing her travels and speaking engagements in the early 30s. She died with her daughter by her bedside in 1937.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Early days
1.1	Before 1884
1.2	Rising tide of visibility
1.3	Transition to Chicago (1893C1894)
2	Chicago and a new career
2.1	1895 - a powerful year
2.2	1896 - diversified topics and places
3	Wider travels, book series and Spiritualist topics
3.1	1897 - Message of the Mystics
3.2	1898 - more personal coverage
3.3	1899 a slower pace, and reaching Boston
3.4	1900 - fewer talks, more distance
4	Finding the Bah's
4.1	1901 a year of changes
4.2	The Boston community
5	Back to Missouri and pilgrimage
6	A book, abroad, and troubled in Britain in absentia
7	War years
7.1	In California
7.2	Traveling
8	Postwar years in New York
8.1	The Rainbow club and Reality magazine
8.2	New York and United Kingdom and beyond
9	New England and the Central States in her last years
10	Legacy
11	Bibliography
12	References
13	Further reading
Early days[edit]
Before 1884[edit]
Mary Hanford Ford's earliest days are framed in two basic sets of facts. She was born on November 1, 1856,[1][2] possibly to a mercantile/banker family[3] in Meadville, Pennsylvania. The family is noted a year later in Williamsport, Pennsylvania.[4] The Kansas City Star obituary noted she had a brother, A.M. Finney, known from Charleston, West Virginia.[4] That would make her father Asahel Clark Finney who spent the last working decade of his life as a partner in a Pennsylvania lumber company.[5] Ford's mother may have been Mary Hanford Edson.[6] Ford is said to have attended a private school[7] or seminary and studied art and languages in Burlington, Vermont.[8] It is not clear how or when Mary moved to the Kansas area ahead of her father in 1882.[5]

Ford was the second wife[9] of Smith Moses Ford, marrying about October 8, 1878 when she was known as Minnie Finnie and was living in Winfield, Kansas.[10] S M Ford was a former alderman, teacher, newspaper writer and eventually newspaper publisher.[11] Their first child, Roland Ford, was born circa 1879.[12]

Circa 1880, Mary Hanford Ford was among a circle of women who formed the Friends Council Club in Kansas City, of intentionally limited number of members, and focused on reviewing the history, literature, philanthropy and art of early civilizations.[11] Circa 1882, Ford is visible entertaining visitors.[13] Another early club Ford was involved in was the Social Science Club that Ford was visible working with in 1884.[14] Ford's daughter Lynette was born 6 June 1883.[citation needed]

Rising tide of visibility[edit]
In 1884 and 1885, Ford's short article, What is wanted, was fairly widely published in Iowa,[15] Kansas,[16] Indiana,[17] Maine,[18] Ohio,[19] and Illinois.[20] As far as is known, this was the first time any of her writings were published, beyond of local papers.

After having been an atheist for most of her life,[21] Ford became a Spiritist and a believer in the afterlife when her father died in Kansas City, in about 1885.[5]

In July 1888, Ford published the instructive article, Mrs. Diaz and the Woman's Exchange Idea, in a periodical.[22] A September article of The York Daily describes her as being, "recognized in the west as an authority on literary matters", and she is quoted saying, of the role of the US President's wife, "...By countenancing the suffrage movement she could make it more fashionable...".[23] In October, she was the only woman, among four vice presidents, elected for a newly founded Missouri and Kansas authors' organization.[24]

Ford's last child appears to have been born in 1888.[25]

In 1889 she was an officer of the Western Authors and Artists Club (WCCA) of Kansas City,[26] writing various articles including a series for Edward Bellamy's The Nationalist,[27] an article reviewing a book on artists for The Dial,[28] and then a series of stories for Wide Awake,[29] a children's magazine, a series that continued in 1890.[30]

In 1891, now a member of the Kansas City Art association, she took part in the opening of an exhibit.[31] This same year she wrote the book, Which will win? or Which wins?,[32] and co-wrote a play. "Mary H. Ford says in her preface to the book that there are many men, like Wagner's Parsifal, whose eyes turn inward, who feel the sufferings of others so vividly that they will turn their backs upon worldly prosperity and sacrifice all worldly profit for the good of their fellow-creatures. With such men lies the possibility of the race for real reform, and they represent proportion of humanity much larger now than at any other time, she thinks."[33] The book is dedicated to the Farmers' Alliance and covers life on farms and the affect mortgage systems had on it,[34] and specifically examined the ways a woman's inheritance could be taken away.[35] It was well reviewed locally, in Chicago and beyond.[36] From a Boston review: "although the work of an unknown author, is regarded as likely to arouse attention. Nothing is known of Mrs. Mary H. Ford of Kansas City, (but) a woman of extended acquaintance both in political and social circles. The didactic moral of the book is interwoven with a love-tale, the idea evidently being to reach the story reading public in the same way that Bellamy reached the public with his 'Looking Backward'."[37] However another reviewer said "If the 'labor question' could be settled by writing weak or sensational novels concerning it, all difficulties would speedily vanish Which Wins, by Mary H Ford would be likely to interest the farmer more if it had less about Parsifal in it."[38] A Letter-to-the-editor campaign by George Ward supported it in several newspapers.[39]

One reviewer profiled Ford herself:

"Mrs Ford is an Eastern woman by birth, and has spent a great deal of her life in Boston, where she is well known and esteemed for her superior capabilities.  She possesses one of the finest libraries west of the Mississippi, which is rich in art works, rare translations from the Sanscrit, and the choicest editions of the poets. Her education is thorough to a remarkable degree Aside from her literary ability, Mrs. Ford is a practical newspaper woman, and can pen a political editorial with the crisp conciseness of a vertebral chief-of-staff. When that historical attempt to run all the emancipated slaves into Kansas was made, Mrs. Ford accepted a commission from the New York Tribune to investigate the matter, and her series of caustic and exhaustive letters attained a national importance."[40]

The new play was called The Syndicate and it opened in November 1891.[41] It was a local success by early 1892 and positives review were carried in various places[42] but its sympathies with farmers and the Farmers' Alliance were controversial to some.[43]

That Spring Ford hosted a tent of her own at a local fair.[44]

Transition to Chicago (1893C1894)[edit]
In March 1893, a man sued Ford's husband $50,000 for having "alienated the affections of his wife and caused her to desert him in 1887" and also for having abducted the couple's daughter in 1888.[45] A week later, replacing a previously announced speaker, Ford gave an hour long address at a mass meeting of the local suffrage movement to encourage women's interest in the upcoming municipal election.[46][47] Ford continued to give lectures on Women's Suffrage, including one detailing the accomplishments the movement had effected in Missouri.[48][49] In May she was again an officer of the WCCA.[50] In June she attended the Chicago World's Fair, which ran from May 1, 1893 to October 30, 1893, where she was seen as a "strong believer in women" and "American art"[51] and gave a talk on "Woman in Art Today".[52] She was later called a guide at the Exposition and the strength of her support for American art was still echoing in October when she again presented, this time on "The Old Masters and the New" (in art)[53] and published an article in the Chicago Tribune covering impressionism at the Expo in October.[54] By early December she and her children[55] were "taken up" by the "society women" of Chicago.[56] She was noted as an avid supporter of impressionism and American art, and was offering classes in her home in Chicago. She also hosted an exhibition in her home in December that was well received in the news[57] and announced a series of lectures for the coming year for the "Arch Club"[58] suggesting she had already traveled in Europe.[59]The club would soon be a primary vehicle for Ford's talks.

In January 1894, she presented "Art and the Revolution" to the Sons of the American Revolution chapter in Chicago. "It was something entirely original, and was in itself almost a history of that time of struggle" and noted particularly Benjamin West and his painting The Death of Wolfe remarking that this was the first American artist to paint what people really wore and not classical garments.[60] In February she gives a talk reviewing sculpture for the Arch club. The article noted that one day at the Exposition she had spoken during the absence of a planned speaker"Mrs. Ford did not look as though she would set the world on fire with her eloquence but she certainly did inspire the audience, and since that memorable day she has made great strides forward."[61] About a week later she gave a talk on French art: "She showed a thorough acquaintance with her subject, and her talk was replete with incidents in the lives of the artists spoken of, as well as thorough criticism of their works."[62] A month later she was doing a talk for the benefit of the University Creche (Day care) of the Children's' Aide Society that featured Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Edward Burne-Jones.[63] The end of that week she gave a talk at Hull House on English art.[64] A couple weeks later she gave a talk for the Arch club on American stained glass.[65] Finishing her winter classes, summer classes were announced in May while she gave a talk at a private collection.[66] In between, she gave classes every two weeks.[67] In the Fall an article of hers on artists lineages was to be published and was noted coming out of Boston.[68] In October, a series of twenty talks by Ford was outlined for Fridays by the Arch club.[69] A month later comes news that Otto's Inspiration will be published,[70] and it is released in 1895.[71] The new series of talks was noted in a few articles: On Millet,[72] American art,[73] and about a week later on French illustrators,[74] for the Arch club. So in 1894 she had taught classes sometimes weekly and given talks noted in newspapers somewhere between monthly and weekly for the year and in the Fall finished a book about to come out. 1895 would see a serious rise in the reports of her talks.

Chicago and a new career[edit]
1895 - a powerful year[edit]
In early January, Ford gave lectures on Honor de Balzac, douard Manet,[75] and on Trilby, a recently published novel.[76] She initiated a series of classes on "English Art",[77] and a second series on Shakespeare, meeting about every two weeks.[78] Meanwhile, individual talks continue into mid-January (even naming one of the rooms after her) for the Arch club.[79] Just a few days later she gave a talk on George Sand,[80] and Trilby,[81] and another talk in the next week.[82] There are yet three more talks noted before the end of January: Millett before the Chicago South Side Women's club,[83] Edward Manet and impressionism for the Arch club,[84] and Rosa Bonheur for her class.[85]

February continued the pace. She began a series before the new Chicago Culture Club at the Church of the Epiphany (Chicago),[86] and less than a week later gave a talk on Hamlet,[87] and then another for a benefit dinner.[88] Just a few days later she gave a talk for the Menoken Club.[89] She ended the Arch club series with a talk on "Degas, Raffaelli, and their theories".[90] There was an individual talk on March 10 on The Tempest,[91] followed by a "salon day" for the Arch club.[92] Then she announced another series of lectures and continued the individual talks. The first series of talks during some recitals at individual's homes on Bethoven, Wagner, and Schumann each a week apart in what is now the Prairie Avenue District.[93] Meanwhile, she gave a talk on "Shakespeare's women" at the new YWCA in what is now the Historic Michigan Boulevard District,[94] Then she lectured on the subject of "American Colonists".[95] A week later she was talking for the Arch club.[96] The last few days of March she addressed and reviewed Chicago artists,[97] in which she was quoted extensively for in a column in The Inter Ocean newspaper of Chicago.[98] Papers also noted that by April the talks had outgrown the space of rooms in churches.[99] Nevertheless, benefits were still held in churches, such as for the YWCA with a talk about John Ruskin, also a Spiritualist.[100] Another publicized talk at a home was on "French Women of the Salon".[101] She made a trip outside Chicago to Sterling, Illinois for a talk the next day.[102] But she was back in time to give a talk in a week,[103] and in a few days was giving a new talk entitled "Nibelungen Lied(sic)".[104] In May she gave two lectures.[105][106] A repeat of one of the recitals comes in early June, held at the Hotel Windermere (Chicago).[107] In a new turn of events, Ford challenged the Inter Ocean art critic on the virtues of impressionism - the critic opens with a line from Ford's letter to her "After having told the world what you see in Manet's pictures, don't you think you should do the graceful thing and tell what the artist sees?". Together they reviewed an exhibition,[108] out of which the critic concedes " and truth to tell, (Manet's defender) took home the palm."

Mary Hanford Ford is located in Greater Chicago Mary Hanford Ford Mary Hanford Ford Mary Hanford Ford Mary Hanford Ford Mary Hanford Ford Mary Hanford Ford Mary Hanford Ford Mary Hanford Ford
Known locations of talks of Ford in 1895
In August, Ford presented on Wagner's trilogy at Green Acre, in Eliot, Maine.[109] This is an early link in events that would become important for Ford in 1901.

In September, with the Arch club, she launched a series for the Winter on "Modern German Art, Literature, and Music",[110] and directly after announcing the series she did a talk at a Wagner recital.[111] Two other Clubs, the Harvard Club and Home Club, announced she would lead a literature group of each.[112] A rather large crowd of women listened to her for a talk entitled "The Colonial Painters, West, Trumbull, Copley, and Stuart" in early October,[113] while the recitals on German art and talks continued.[114] A free series of classes was then opened up for working-class ladies taught by Ford.[115]

The Chicago Culture club was back from the summer break as well with Ford giving the kick off talk for the Fall,[116] followed soon by an announcement of a series on French art through the Fall,[117] and ford gave individuals talks - a charity[118] recital,[119] on Louis David[120] and even a bridal rehearsal,[121] all before the end of October.

In November, Ford gave another talk on Wagner,[122] as well as "Delarouche and the Vernets".[123] A lecture a week later was presented in a home,[124] and it was announced the success of the Arch club had reached a point of offering prizes at the next exhibition to come up.[125] Ford gave a talk at the next meeting,[126] while continuing to support the Chicago Culture Club.[127] November closed a week later with talks on Ludwig Knaus and Johann Georg Meyer,[128] and a reception honoring a number of women including Ford - an event Ford still managed to present a talk at, (this time on Alexander Dumas.)[129]

December opens with the art critic of the Inter Ocean quoting Ford analysing the difference between Glasgow School of Art practices and American and Danish-Norwegian styles of the period, following an exhibition.[130] This was followed a week later by Ford giving a talk on "Millet and the Barbizon Circle".[131] Then the judges for the Arch prize exhibition are announced with Ford among them, indeed representing the Arch club itself.[132]

At least by the end of the year she was living at 3747 Langley Ave.[133]

1896 - diversified topics and places[edit]
In January, Ford introduced a weekly lecture series via the Chicago Culture Club on the subject of French literary figures, Flaubert and Goncourt brothers,[134] that continued into February,[135] and "A Talk on Dickens" for a benefit.[136] Only a day later Ford gave a talk for a school board,[137] and the next day, on Thackeray, Dickens' Pickwick, George Eliot, Eugene Field, and James Whitcomb Riley.[138] By mid-February Ford had taken up another new topic - silk[139] - and gave a talk for a benefit,[140] and another about Emile Zola.[141] And then, for the first time, Ford solos presenting her talks at a theatre with tikets and she does so with a talk on literary figures,[142] an event that drew hundreds as part of a series.[143] Finally it came time for the Arch Club's prize exhibition "Salon".[144] The talks progressed and the last talk of February was before the Culture Club as part of an ensemble of women talking on Charles Baudelaire and similar poets,[145] as well as another ensemble about artful clothing.[146]

March continued presentations among an ensemble,[147] and Ford again presented a talk at a theatre,[148] with two more talks lined up the second week.[149] Then a break of a week before "Fifteen minutes with Eugene Field" was presented at the Matheon Club reception.[150] In a few days another new topic of ceramics in art was presented.[151] At the Chicago Culture Club reception a couple days later she gave two talks.[152] That was followed by a talk on "The New Woman" a week later.[153]

In April, Ford again traveled to Sterling, Illinois.[154] She then pressed on to Bloomington, Illinois,[155] and returned to the Chicago area for a talk in Oak Park, Illinois,[156] and Evanston, Illinois.[157] Then there seems to be a break to mid-May before assisting with a benefit exhibition.[158]

Mary Hanford Ford is located in USA BloomingtonBloomington Oak ParkOak Park LincolnLincoln Fort WayneFort Wayne
Early travels of Mary Hanford Ford in 1896
That summer, Ford took part in a Chautauqua, another venue previously untapped, and rather farther afield, out of Lincoln, Nebraska.[159] About a month later she gave a talk on culinary choices for the heat of the summer in Chicago,[160] and then a talk at a recital.[161] Then she assists with an exhibition from artists in the public school system.[162]

Following the breakup scandal in Kansas City and moving to Chicago several years before her husband filed for divorce claiming alienation of affection in September.[163] Initially there is no comment of any kind - Ford is lined up for the Arch's Salon to happen in October.[164] However, in early October Ford appears in Kansas City - giving a talk on "Russia" (with front page coverage)[165] and someone wrote a letter to the editor proclaiming her success in Chicago.[166] Days later she presents "Ibsen the Mystic's, Brand, and Peer Gynt".[167] A week later she was speaking about "Italian Masters" a few states over in Fort Wayne, Indiana.[168] Then two talks were announced in Chicago - the first on Turgenev and the second on Liszt.[169] and then a week later another on American art.[170] Then she spoke on Oliver Wendell Holmes for the Tuesday Club,[171] Nathaniel Hawthorne and the Scarlet Letter to the Wildwood club,[172] "American Poets" later in December,[173] and "George Meredith, His Poems and Works".[174] Already one was announced for January.[175]

Wider travels, book series and Spiritualist topics[edit]
1897 - Message of the Mystics[edit]
Ford introduced the topic of vegetarianism,[176] and then in a couple days on an English novelist.[177] A lecture was announced for April in Sterling, Illinois.[178] A week later she was talking on "American Religious Painters".[179]

During this year, Ford published her three books, The Holy Grail: The Silent Teacher, Goethe's Faust: Its Ethical Symbolism and Balzac's Seraphita: The Mystery of Sex, a series known as Message of the Mystics.[180] In The Holy Grail: The Silent Teacher Ford shared her theory that medieval romantic texts use Kabbalistic numerology to convey hidden esoteric messages.[181] She delivered a series of six lectures, based on the books, titled The Universal Ministry with the aim of "...pointing out the unanimity with which the great poets and teachers of the world have preached the same ethical and spiritual truth." The last lecture in this series was on Spiritualist, Elizabeth Stuart Phelps.[182]

Still in January, she gave a talk for the Independent Penwomen's Club,[183] as well as at a private home.[184] A week later she gave a talk for the Arch club.[185] In February she was scheduled for a short series of talks in Goshen, Indiana.[186] A week later a retired friend from the Chicago Daily Tribune committed suicide, naming her as one to receive the news of it at her request.[187] She gave a series of lectures at the Masonic Temple,[188] on variations of "The Universal Ministry" subjects.[189] Still she kept up individual talks for the Arch club,[190] one for a benefit,[191] as February drew to a close and another as March opened.[192] Minding of the pending divorce in Kansas City it is noted tickets for a talk of hers there were sold starting mid-March.[193] Meanwhile, she launched another series of talks for the Arch club,[194] a talk on color,[195] and a week later in Goshen, Indiana again,[196] to turn around back to Chicago the next day for a talk.[197] It is at the beginning of April that Ford is in Kansas City giving her series of talks including the "Holy Grail" and other recent topics,[198] as well as receptions held in her honor,[199] and individual talks for a benefit,[200] and otherwise.[201] She gives her last talk,[202] and notes of her talks are reported,[203] while she gone back to Chicago.[204]

The divorce was granted, noting she didn't even appear in court.[205] She returned anyway in another month - a quiet month considering her usual pattern - announcing a series and a summer appearance,[206] and still the individual talks here and there, over in Leavenworth, Kansas,[207] before the Kansas City Chautauqua, (as an advertised lead attraction),[208] speaking in the "Hall of Philosophy".[209] Still she squeezed in individual talks in June,[210] including a benefit,[211] before heading back to Chicago. However, after a month plus she appears giving talks in Ludington, Michigan on the social mission of Christianity,[212] and then in Waterloo, Iowa initiating a series of talks.[213] The next day still in Waterloo she gave two talks.[214] Later in August she returned to the Chicago area.[215]

The Arch club had Ford as the "club lecturer" for the season and noted two talks specifically in October,[216] and then a talk at the Menoken Club.[217] Later in October at a conference of women's clubs Ford spoke of promoting arts with the group letting her talk twice the allotted time.[218]

November begins with a talk at the Arch club,[219] with another in a couple weeks.[220] Her book series Message of the Mystics was noted for sale in Kansas City.[221] A series of conferences on social development were announced by the Forward Movement and Ford was among the speakers.[222] She closes out November with a talk for the Arch club.[223]

Ford starts another series of talks in December featured in a home.[224] The Forward Movemnent's speakers for the conferences in the second week of December were announced including Clarence Darrow and Ford, (on "The Artist's Aristocracy".)[225] Her talk focused on John Ruskin, (also a Spiritualist), and William Morris.[226] She returns to the subject of Ruskin two weeks later.[227] Meanwhile, her books continued to be noticed,[228] and received some summary in the publication of it as the year closes.[229]

1898 - more personal coverage[edit]
The new year begins the same "Holy Grail" talk from her books, first before the "Noonday Rest" Club - reportedly with some 300 present - and broaching a Parcifal angle that would later be a book.[230] Just a couple days later she was giving the same named talk to clubs in Sedalia, Missouri.[231] A week later she is back in Chicago this time speaking on Tolstoi,[232] and the ongoing series in a home continued into February.[233] Among these she also attended a regional conference of women clubs in Missouri.[234] Still in February she gave a talk to the Hull House women about a trip of hers to Spain,[235] and then addressed the Nineteenth Century Club in Benton Harbor, Michigan before mid-February.[236] The next talk was for the Englewood Woman's club and was on Ivan Turgenev,[237] and then Rembrandt over in Fort Wayne, Indiana (that makes three states in one month she gave talks,)[238] and scheduled for a talk in Sterling, Illinois next month,[239] though she finishes out February back in Chicago.[240]

March begins with a talk before the Arch club on Robert Louis Stevenson,[241] followed by a talk in a home on Quo vadis, (possibly on the novel).[242] A day later she returned to her subject "The Holy Grail".[243] A week later she is indeed in Fort Wayne.[244]

Mary Hanford Ford is located in USA SedaliaSedalia Kansas CityKansas City Benton HarborBenton Harbor Fort WayneFort Wayne SterlingSterling MarshallMarshall TopekaTopeka WaterlooWaterloo New York CityNew York City DixonDixon
Early travels of Mary Hanford Ford in 1898
In April she was visible giving a talk before the "Twentieth Century Sanitary Home and Bulsson Institute" in Chicago,[245] and then the ?olus club.[246] Just a couple days later she spoke before the Society of Art on "Israel and His Followers".[247] A week later she is in Marshall, Michigan giving a talk.[248] She gave a series of talks in Topeka, Kansas before mid-May, the first program of the federated clubs,[249] before returning to Chicago, just days later, speaking on James Whitcomb Riley and Eugene Field.[250] A week later Ford was set to be one of the speakers before a conference of clubs across the city along with artists and instructors.[251] A wider regional conference was set in Denver in June and Ford went representing the Aloha club.[252] In early July she was in the Waterloo Chautauqua.[253] Ford was recognized as a key figure in Arche club and Chicago Culture Club history.[254]

In August, the Ford family made the news with their picnics on the beach of Lake Michigan. Mary, her children and a few other families, with their several youths, are noted as attending.[255] The family's home also made the news with Ford talking about a ghost in her home, (house keeper, children, and herself speaking of it.)[256] Another ghost reference briefly referred back to this coverage later in September.[257]

In September, Hull House announced a series through the Fall, Winter and into the Spring, with Ford giving a talk once a month from October to March.[258] The Arch club similarly announces a series of talks including Ford every other week into about January.[259] The Arch coverage was noted in Nebraska.[260]

The Chicago Times-Herald did a profile of Ford in November and it is echoed widely through December.[55] Calling her "a woman of wide intellectuality" there is no mention of her husband's publicity or divorce. It simply refers to "unexpected circumstance which suddenly necessitate the caring for and education of her children dropping of the financial burden upon her slender shoulders".[55] It credits her with over 800 talks and across many major cities(though not a detailed accounting) and having given lectures in German and French in addition to English.[55] Another article, and her talk before the Hull House, noted she "for three consecutive years has come before the club, each time with something new in itself, or, if old, made new by the happy, infectious personality of the speaker."[261] Now in November, talks continued with Ford among a free series.[262] She was profiled on her sense of being guided in some decisions like coming to Chicago.[263] In the interview she spoke of dreaming about the "conference of the World's Unity league" at Lake Geneva with a figure that told her to go.[264] Late in November she was again profiled, noting she was "abolishing all class distinction within her household"[265] having gone from perhaps an anarchist view to a Libertarian socialism view - "At all events, I believe in sowing the good seed whenever possible."[265] Then she spoke before the Englewood Woman's club,[266] then in a week before the Arch club,[267] and contributed to a benefit reception.[268] Talks continue to the end of November.[269][270]

And December's talks began on Ralph Waldo Emerson,[271] followed by others,[272] including Percy Bysshe Shelley.[273] She made it to New York City in mid-December[274] and ended the year in Dixon, Illinois.[275]

1899 a slower pace, and reaching Boston[edit]
Ford begins the year reviewing American decorative art with reproductions from the Boston Public Library.[276] Next was "Russia" before the Chicago Literary Score,[277] and then on Tennyson (even advertised in Nebraska.)[278]

In February, after two weeks, she talks again,[279] and then in another two weeks is in Benton Harbor, Michigan on the Holy Grail topic.[280] By late February a series was run in Dixon, Illinois for the Phidian Art Club,[281] but ends the month in Fort Wayne, Indiana(noting in three days she did three talks in two cities.)[282] In March she was back in Fort Wayne[283] and right back to Chicago,[284] and back still again to Fort Wayne.[285] A week later she offered a talk at a benefit in Chicago for a "Charity Hospital"[286] and soon after on Maeterlinck for the Chicago Culture Club.[287] A week later she spoke for the Independent Pen Woman's Club on her subject of "The Aristocracy of Art",[288] and then she was in Dixon, Illinois talking on John La Farge.[289] A week later she was talking on "Society and Fiction" at another benefit for the same "Charity Hospital",[290] and before a program Ford devised for a club in Springfield, Missouri.[291] After a couple weeks she gave a talk at a home on "The Present Day Value of Occultism".[292]

In later April she was named an associate director of the Illinois Art league,[293] and closed out the month at a home based talk "The reality of psychic vision".[294]

After taking off near two weeks she gives a talk on Victor Hugo,[295] and then in July in a Logansport, Indiana a quip of hers heads social outline of a suggested menu.[296]

In August she goes from a talk in Dubuque, Iowa,[297] to a talk in the Alice Breed home in Lynn, Massachusetts where she did a series of some ten of her lecture subjects - and this noted in the Kansas City area.[298] The Breed family would be one she would have many interactions with in coming years. From September to October is there a gap in coverage. She is next noted in Dubuque, Iowa in mid-October in the midst of a series of talks.[299] She is announced in the season's talks of the Chicago Culture Club as well.[300] She presents at talk for the Arch club later in October,[301] among a larger list of speakers.[302] A month later she talked on Harriet Beecher Stowe for the Arch Club.[303] In a few days she gave a talk in Kansas City,[304] and was scheduled for a series in Dixon, Illinois in late November.[305] Two weeks later in near mid-December she is listed as a guest at a breakfast while another presents a talk for the meeting.[306]

1900 - fewer talks, more distance[edit]
January 1900 begins with a longer version, and more in her own words, of the ghost story in Ford's home - and carried in the New York Tribune.[307] Alittle more than a week later Ford gives a talk on Bret Harte for the Arch club.[308] In a couple days she shares a discussion with another speaker on the Fabian Society,[309] and another on Bret Harte.[310]

Mary Hanford Ford is located in USA FreeportFreeport TopekaTopeka MarshallMarshall OttumwaOttumwa Fort WayneFort Wayne SedaliaSedalia LynnLynn
Travels of Mary Hanford Ford in 1900
In February a poem of hers is published in the New York Times echoed from the Chicago Post - "The song unsung".[311] A week later she gives a talk on William Dean Howells for the Arch club.[312] She closes out February with a talk on Whistler.[313] Near two weeks later she is in Fort Wayne,[314] before heading back to New York.[315] There is a district club meeting she talks at on color,[316] and a few days later she is in Dixon, Illinois for a talk each offered on color,[317] and French artists.[318] By the end of April she is back in Chicago giving a talk on "American Poets".[319]

The next talk, still on color, is in latter May, in Freeport, Illinois,[320] and she returns a week later to repeat,[321] and was the center of a reception June 5[322] directly before going to Ottumwa, Iowa before the second week of June where she accomplished two series of lectures.[323]

The earliest newspaper coverage of the Bah' Faith, a religion she was about to adopt, in the Chicago area - the first group of Bah's in the country - occurs from mid-October 1900.[324][325][326] However Ford was out of town - in mid-October Ford began a series of talks in Oak Park, Illinois,[327] mid-November successively in Kansas City,[328] Bloomington, Illinois,[329] and then Sedalia, Missouri.[330]

She wrote the introduction to The story of Abraham Lincoln; or, The journey from the log cabin to the White House by Eleanor Gridley.[331]

Finding the Bah's[edit]
1901 a year of changes[edit]
Like the recent Januaries, Ford's ghost-story home was referred to by another newspaper story - this time someone was seeking to live in one like hers. It turns out Ford's family is no longer living there.[332] Her household was noted as an eclectic mix of family and boarders - her three children, Roland, Lynette and Gareth; a Germon woman and her young child; of an American woman and her son; of a young African or African American student of Shakespeare.[21]

In the Winter of 1900-1901 Ford took a comparative religion class and encountered the Bah' Faith.[21] This could have been, for example, through the University of Chicago, through "Vesper Services" lectures,[333][334] or academic classes, (for example "Religions of ancient India and Persia".)[335] John Henry Barrows was a staff member and had been deeply involved in the 1993 World Parliament of Religions, where the Bah' Faith was mentioned,[336] and that winter Charles Cuthbert Hall had been hired by the university,[337] being appointed to an endowed lectureship based on the enthusiasm of the Parliament of Religions.[338][339] It wouldn't be the only such series to be undertaken.[340] However, in addition, whether Ford knew it or not, Bah's had arrived in Chicago who were sent by `Abdu'l-Bah and began public presentations on the religion in December 1900 and January 1901.[341]

Ford's ex-husband, Smith Moses Ford, died April 10.[342]

The New York Times noted her selling an apartment in New York to her son in July.[343]

After the comparative religion class in Chicago, Ford heard that more about the religion was to be learned at Green Acre[21] at the northern fringe of Greater Boston. Sarah Farmer, founder of Green Acre, was publicly linked with the religion in June after she had found truth in various religions and quasi-religious groups.[344] But of the Bah' Faith, it was explained, "she has found the common faith in which all devout souls may unite and yet be free."[344] It was then announced Green Acre would be a place to learn of the religion, run in parallel with the other classes already established, but for free.[345] James T. Bixby, who had written previous on the religion's history,[346] (which Ford herself would soon write differently,)[347] was presenting on the religion,[348] but Mrz Abu'l-Fadl, among the most scholarly trained Bah's of the time, was there.[344][349][350] Ali Kuli Khan, to serve as his translator, arrived in the United States in June.[351] A Bah' publication notes Fadl's talk titled "Utterances of Bahullh and Ford herself giving a talk "Lectures in Literature".[352] Green Acre closed for the season in September.[353]


Green Acre is on the southern border of Maine and New Hampshire
Abu'l-Fadl had accompanied Anton Hadded, the first Bah' to live in the United States, on his return trip to America.[349] They too had been sent by then head of the religion, `Abdu'l-Bah.[350] The later well known Bah' Agnes Baldwin Alexander was there.[354] It was at these classes with Abu'l-Fadl Ford is considered to have joined the religion,[21][349] at the age of 44.

In Arches of the Years Alice Breed's granddaughter Marzieh Gail recalled: "When (Ali Kuli Khan) was translating for Mrz Abu'l-Fadl at Green Acre, Mary Hanford Ford introduced him to Alice Breed".[355] Gail also noted Ford was the "spiritual mother" of Alice Breed - that Ford lead her to the religion.[356] Ford was visible in the Boston area in October[357] and November where she gave a talk at Chickering Hall, Boston, on "The Primitive Church, or the Ideal of Brotherhood Love".[358]

In November there was also more coverage of Bah's in New York highlighting Lua Getsinger.[350]

The Boston community[edit]
In January news of Farmer's involvement in the religion continued to spread[359] as well as of the religion in general,[360] and Ford is known to have moved to Boston - Ford and the Breed family invited Ali Kuli Khan to move to Boston and together form the first active community of Bah's there.[349]

News that Ford was working on translating Charles Paul de Kock's began to be noted in 1902,[361] and 1903.[362] News spread (in Kansas City and Kansas) that the Bah' Faith was being promoted in New England.[363] Ford is noted in Boston in November giving her talk on "The Holy Grail".[364] By December Bah's in Chicago know she is a Bah' and working with Sarah Farmer on projects.[365]

In March 1904 someone gave a talk on Ford's books in Kansas,[366] while news of another book of Ford's came out - Legends of Parsifal[367] - and news of it continues progressively over the year.[368] Her Kock books also came out.[369] Still news on her "The Holy Grail" appears.[370]

In October Khan and Florence Breed were married.[371]

In December Ford gave her Grail talk to the Lethren club in Boston.[372]

Ali Kuli Khan and perhaps others passed most of the year of 1905 in Green Acre.[373] Ford was listed as an honorary member of the Arch Club that year.[374]

In April 1906 Ali Kuli Khan gave a talk at the Breed home and then he and his new wife left for Persia.[373] During their trip they first went on pilgrimage to meet `Abdu'l-Bah where Mrs. Ali Kuli Khan later recalled these words of `Abdu'l-Bah - "It is true that Mrs. Ford has served humanity long and faithfully. Now tell her, if she will arise to serve the Cause of Bah'u'llh with equal zeal and fidelity, her name will be mentioned in all the worlds of God."[3]

The August issue of Brush and Pencil had an article "American Art Eminently Distinctive" by Ford.[375] The December issue of Success (magazine) had a short story by Ford: "Love enough for all".[376] The story begins with a husband swearing about "modern club-woman" with contrary ideas on raising children, but as the story continues the impatient mother gets in an accident who did not deal well with the child that adored her yet kept her from clubs. While recuperating she marvels at the housewife who can hold a conversation with guests and husband, children entertained, house well kept, and she well loved. The recuperating lady dreams and sees marvels all giving gifts to this one who loves all and is loved.[377]

In the Fall of 1906 Ford had a story published in the Overland Monthly.[378]

By the Winter of 1906 Louis Bourgeois, later architect of the Bah' House of Worship in Wilmette, Illinois, and his wife had joined the religion after having "come into association with the Baha'i Faith through Marie Watson and Mary Hanford Ford."[379]

Back to Missouri and pilgrimage[edit]
Ford spoke of Ibsen at Frazer Hall at the University of Kansas in January 1907 and she notes she is going abroad.[380] In February Ford addressed comments on each of the artists showing at a university art exhibit,[381] and got an article published in The Public.[382] In April Ford is on the program of a Kansas state meeting of women's clubs.[383]

Ford wrote that she went on pilgrimage to meet `Abdu'l-Bah in 1907 traveling over land through Europe, Turkey, and down through Syria,[384] at the age of 50. She is noted connecting with Bah's in Paris on the way to Switzerland/Italy.[355] Ford later wrote of getting passed "plague and quarantine" and of hearing of fresh Baha'i martyrs while staying in Paris.

The house occupied by `Abdu'l-Bah in Palestine then was the House of Abdullh Psh.

January 1908 begins with notice that Ford's talks are the first priority of the federated clubs of Topeka,[385] while she is visible in Kansas City,[386] but it is still an open question in early February what will happen.[387] A week later the news is clear - Ford is to come in March for a short series of lectures.[388] It is said she gave some talks in Kansas City in late February or early March.[389] The topic of her Topeka talks announced is Chateaux de Touraine. Final preparations are taken,[390] and the upcoming talks are praised suggesting it has been previewed.[391] The first talk centers on "Chinon and Loches" and mentions Joan of Arc,[392] a mention she would later use to example love in religion.[393]

Overall the Bah's in Chicago heard that Ford was active in Kansas City.[394]

In September Ford is noted living in Kansas City,[395] and by November she is noted giving "parlor talks".[396] In December she attends, and her comments are reported for, an exhibition in Kansas City.[397]

In January 1909 Ford is still drawing on her pilgrimage experience referring to descriptions in Turkey and Syria in a talk she gave in Leavenworth, Kansas - and a series of talks is also announced,[398] followed by another focused on Italian cities.[399] But in February she offers an individual talk as well - "Social adjustment, family relation and revival of neighborship",[400] and offers followup talks on the religion.[401] After a month another talk is visible,[402] which were then called weekly talks, (the next one on American art and craftsman guild,[403] then on called "books as dangerous things".)[404]

Up until mid-June Ford had been a vice president of the Women's Dining Club but on the resignation of the president noting that the club had "formed among the women who have accomplished things in Kansas City to solve the problems which confront women in this city", Ford was elected president.[405]

Later in December it is noted in New York that Ford had spoken among a meeting of women who had been on strike or worked in a sweatshop.[406] But it was more than news from Kansas - she was actually in New York amidst suffrage meetings with Alva Belmont.[407]

A book, abroad, and troubled in Britain in absentia[edit]
1910 starts out noting Ford's daughter Lynette lived in Leavenworth, Kansas by February 1910 and Ford was noted visiting over the previous winter finishing work on a book.[408] Ford published The Oriental Rose: Or, The Teachings of Abdul Baha which Trace the Chart of "the Shining Pathway" in 1910[347] and it came out before mid-October.[409]

In March, Ford was elected to the Bah' organization "Woman's Board" of New York, a precursor to the Local Assembly, and was a delegate to the national convention of Bah's.[410] She visited John Sloan in New York in April.[411] While in New York, she spoke to an audience about the religion, her pilgrimage,[412] and her various activities were noted thankfully.[413]

A July issue of Post Magazine included an article On the Equivocation of 'Matter,[414] an article that was also published in the Buffalo Courier.[415]

Starting in 1910, the head of the Bah' Faith, `Abdu'l-Bah, was on various stages of a journey once freed from arrest. During the period in Paris there is record of a phone call - the caller may have been Ford.[416] Ford was in Paris and was happy to see him free.[417][418] She left a description and recorded some of the talks and described the atmosphere of how being around him was for people. She spent two weeks there with `Abdu'l-Bah.[21]

A month before `Abdu'l-Bah's arrival in America, Ford wrote an article profiling the history of the religion, its presence in parts of the world, and `Abdu'l-Bah himself which covered over half a page in the New York Sun.[419] `Abdu'l-Bah left America for Britain in December, France in January, Germany in April. In February 1913 Ford's book Oriental Rose was being read and commented on by Marshall Black in prison in California.[420]

In MarchCApril 1913 a suffrage women's organization, the Women's Social and Political Union(WSPU) in Britain, was broken up by Scotland Yard.[421][422] Led by Flora Drummond the group tried Ford in absentia in April for their failure of plans.[423] Arrests and releases took place in February and March and some of the incidents were coordinated by WPSU itself.[424] Ford was present and acting for the release, and coverage did appear in American newspapers,[425] but she claimed she knew nothing of any of the charges the group had brought against her. Newspapers covered the report in many places,[426] including places Ford had given talks - Independence, Kansas,[427] Fort Wayne, Indiana,[428] and Boston, Massachusetts.[429] Some tensions among suffrage workers in Britain had attempted an arson and bombing campaign and the group had been infiltrated by women working for Scotland Yard[430] who passed on warns of the violence of the group.[421][422] Late April coverage vindicated Ford and that her involvement had been through diplomatic channels only.[431] While this news unfolded in later April Ford attended and addressed the national convention of Bah's in New York.[432] Later in June she was noted speaking on "Abdul Baha's teaching on Immortality", her first known talk on the religion to a general audience, to the "Negro Society for Historical Research" cofounded by John Edward Bruce and Arturo Alfonso Schomburg.[433]

After `Abdu'l-Bah returned to Egypt almost ending his travels outside of Palestine he sent a tablet/letter responding to a letter from Ford on October 23, 1913.[434]

War years[edit]
In California[edit]
In 1914 Ford is noted coming from Florence, Italy and addressed an audience in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania on the brewing "European War" as it was called.[435]

In 1915 the Bah's organized a presence at the PanamaCPacific International Exposition and Ford was a keynote speaker.[436] Her talk, as part of a review of the entire proceedings, was included in Bah' World, a text bringing together developments of the religion from around the world, in volume 8.[437] This was followed by a Bah' meeting during Ridvn at the home of Helen S. Goodall in Oakland, California Ford attended and reported on in Star of the West, among the earliest national publications of the religion.[438] Ford continued in Oakland in October with a month of Monday lectures on art hosted by a group of women including Florence Breed Khan, or as she was called, Mrs. Ali Kuli Khan.[439] The Khan's had hit a "rough patch" in their marriage exacerbated by subterfuge by Persian relations during which Ford became concerned as she had introduced them.[355] While there she was visited by her son Roland.[440] Ford visited Portland and Seattle Bah's,[21] and then another series of talks was noted in November back in Oakland,[441] as well as a separate talk on peace.[442] Come January 1916 another series was launched in Oakland and highlighted the new architectural forms in the West of the US.[443] In February Ford lectures for Mills College,[444] in March she begins a series of talks,[445] and lectures for the Ebell Society club[446] that extends into May.[445] Meanwhile, Ford's mother died in March,[447] and in April Ford and Mrs. Khan are noted as patronesses of a child theatre.[448]

Traveling[edit]
Mary Hanford Ford is located in USA Washington, D.C.Washington, D.C. WilmetteWilmette BostonBoston New YorkNew York TopekaTopeka OaklandOakland
Early travels giving talks as a Bah'
By September 1916, Ford had begun traveling. First she spoke before the Bah's of Washington, D.C. on peace,[449] then early November she gave a talk "Spiritual Internationalism" for the Chicago Peace Society, in cooperation with the Chicago Branch of the Woman's Peace Party,[450] and in Wilmette, Illinois a little over a week later was announcing the purchase of increased land area for the Bah' House of Worship in Wilmette.[451]

In January 1917, Ford was back in Washington D.C.,[452] and in March she was in Boston speaking before the "Free Religious Association of America",[453] and contributed an article to Star of the West on "The economic teaching of Abdul-Baha",[454] which was later included in the first Bah' World volume.[437] In April she was in New York at a Friends of Abdul Baha meeting at St. Mark's in-the-Bouwerie,[455] and at the national Bah' convention held in Boston,[456] and elsewhere in May.[457] By August she was in Topeka Kansas giving her first talk in the region presenting the religion.[458] She mentioned H. G. Wells' publication, God the Invisible King, which mentioned the religion (and to Ford's reading matched the idea of God in the Bah' Faith.)

By January 1918 Ford was back in the Oakland California area helping to host non-denominational meetings on uplifting people's lives.[459] By April, Ford was also giving a talk on art.[460] That December, she was back in Kansas for a weekly series of talks,[461] as well as individual talks.[462] On January 26, 1919, Ford received another letter/tablet from `Abdu'l-Bah in response to a letter from her.[434]

In May she was on the program for the national Bah' observance during Ridvn again,[463] and then addressed the national convention of Bah's and her talk published in the Star of the West.[464]

Mary Hanford Ford is located in USA BuffaloBuffalo SanduskySandusky Kansas CityKansas City PittsburgPittsburg UrbanaUrbana ChicagoChicago St. JosephSt. Joseph SterlingSterling
Second tour of talks as a Bah'
In July she was in Buffalo, New York giving a talk on the religion,[465] then Sandusky, Ohio in August,[466] Pittsburg, Kansas in September,[467] Urbana, Illinois in October,[468] Chicago, Illinois the next day,[469] before doing a round of locations in Kansas: after a short say in Kansas City she went to St. Joseph, Kansas,[470] and was scheduled for Hutchinson, Kansas in January 1920.[471] These do indeed occur,[472] as well as a side trip to Sterling, Kansas for a talk.[473] Then Ford was in Hutchinson, Kansas for a reception[474] following a week of talks.[475] But soon she was back in New York and this time for an extended stay.

Postwar years in New York[edit]
In February 1920, Ford was in New York for a national meeting of Bah's[476] and still around the area a couple weeks later in Brooklyn.[477] even into April[478] mixing explicitly Bah' oriented talks and music or art topics. In May at the meeting during Ridvan Ford addressed the attendees.[479]

She made a steadfast presence during an extended exhibition with a model of Temple during its stay in New York.[480][481] This was before later August, 1920.[482]

The Rainbow club and Reality magazine[edit]
In July 1920, Ford attended the First Emmanuel Church founded by African-American Rev. Richard M. Bolden at 105 W 113th St, New York for a meeting of the "Rainbow Circle" which carried on Bah' topics.[483] In December she addressed the congregation on Sunday morning.[484] From May to December 1921, Ford participated in a number of Rainbow Circle meetings.[485]

May[486] - the "Baha'i Circle" was held
June[487] - the "Rainbow Circle" was held
July[488] - the "Rainbow Circle" had moved to a Thursday evening
August several times[489][490][491] the "Bahai Association" and "Rainbow Circle" both met
September [492] the "Rainbow Circle" met
In September she also spoke at another Baha'i Center, the so-called Omar Khayyam, opened by some Persian Bah's.[493]
December[494] - the "Rainbow Circle" shared news of Abdu'l-Baha's passing and Ford read a letter, "The necessity of following divine teachings", by `Abdu'l-Bah. Ford is known to have received a third letter/tablet from `Abdu'l-Bah but the date is unknown and Ford was in possession of other letters/tablets that she contributed to be published in 1923 though to whom the letters were addressed is undocumented.[434]
January 1922[495] - at the Sunday afternoon meeting of the "Bahai Association"; the Thursday evening "Rainbow Circle" meeting was noted as an interracial one, and a letter was read reporting events in Haifa telling of the death and funeral of `Abdu'l-Bah.
February[496] - The "Bahai meeting" was held as well as the "Rainbow Circle".
In March Bah's sponsored a dinner in New York City as an instance of its teaching on race unity - Ford spoke at the event along with Louis G. Gregory, Horace Holley, W. E. B. DuBois and others.[497]
Mary Hanford Ford is located in Manhattan Bahai Library(1)Bahai Library(1) Rainbow CircleRainbow Circle
Baha'i talks in New York City
Through 1921 Ford began to contribute to another Bah' journal - Reality magazine - published out of New York City:

January - "Claude Bragdon on the Fourth Dimension"[498]
February - "The Great Memorial of George Grey Barnard"[499]
June - "The Current Art", (reviewing the recent work of George Luks, Victor Higgins, and others as well as general exhibits.)[500]
July - "The Symbolism of the Baha'i Temple".[501] (note "The Current Art" from June was reprinted in July.)[502]
August - "The Current Art" as a recurring column appears reviewing recent sales at the Anderson Galleries as a kick off to review American Art more broadly and the notes Marco Zim had done a portrait of `Abdu'l-Bah and hoped to do more.[503]
September: "The Current Art", in which she examines some cases of why artists are artists and then notes another portrait of 'Abdu'l-Bah - that of Frances Soule Campbell[504] who had been a published artist of some years.[505]
October: "The Current Art", noted and defended the criticized showing of Impressionist and Post-impressionist exhibit at the Metropolitan Museum that had affected American artists and then notes recent bust of Dante by Paolo Abbate and work by Louis Keila.[506]
November - "The Current Art" notes the struggle of the wealthy with prospects of managing wealth with art as a need of the soul sometimes lost in the materialism of wealth and goes on to review notes Charles W. Bartlett and returns to the work of Marco Zim who has background as sculptor, painter, and etcher.[507]
December - "The Current Art" notes a traveling exhibit of American art showing in New York noting many artists and the inability to cover it all in just one article.[508]
In addition to printing articles of hers, Reality also noted some of her activities, some of which were also mixed with other sources of coverage. "Tribute to Lathrop Ripley",(probably for the artist associated with the Rocky Mountain National Park region,)[509] by Ford, was an address March 6, 1921 she gave in Kansas City, Missouri, her last known talk in the region, at the age of 64.[510] Then April 13 she was at a meeting at the New York "Bahai Library" center at 416 Madison Ave. where she gave talks along with James F. Morton Jr. and Juliet Thompson.[511] The April 1921 issue of Reality noted after she had been spent much of the past winter at the Library that she had gone to Florida to be treated by Dr. Walter A. Guy in St. Augustine, Florida.[512] The May issue noted her return and "constant daily attendance the Baha'i Library".[511]

From April to September 1922 Ford took on general editor responsibilities of Reality magazine.[513] Ford tried to navigate between positions she saw as "illiberalism" in the religion[513] on the one side and editorial directives by then owner of the magazine - Herold Sweetser Robinson - that Ford failed to sustain when Robinson took the magazine down an editorial path unsupported by the mainstream in the religion.[513] See American divisions over Shoghi Effendi as Guardian. In August an article of Ford's on the benefits of meditation was published in the mainstream journal of the religion, Star of the West.[514]

New York and United Kingdom and beyond[edit]
Ford was remembered as an organizing focus of the Chicago Culture Club in April 1923.[515]

Ford's first known talks at Green Acre, since joining the religion there 22 years earlier, were in July.[516]

In February 1924 Ford gave a talk on "Communication between the Two Worlds" at a Spiritualist meeting,[517] as well as the Bahai Library in August,[518] and November.[519] In December she talked for the Woman's Advance Club.[520]

Sometime in 1924 Ford encountered Philip Leonard Green who two decades later would recall encountering the religion by contact from Ford and her gift of her book "The World of Abdu'l-Baha".[521]

January 1925 opens with talks at the Bahai Library at 250 W 57th St.,[522] as well as attended a banquet at a Hindu center.[523] Her talks at the Bah' Center continue in February,[524] March,[525] and April.[526] Also the April edition of Star of the West included an article on "The new feeling of brotherhood".[527] Talks continued at the Bahai Library in May,[528] and June.[529] There was a break for the summer.

In September Ford was remembered for her contribution to the Arch club studies.[530]

Ford's talks at the Bahai Library pick up in October.[531] In October Ford also represented the Bah's at a multi-faith "tribute" to Judaism in West Virginia.[532]

Ford contributed a brief definition of Baha'u'llah in Hartmann's Who's Who in Occult, Psychic and Spiritual Realms published in November,[533] and then Ford took up talks in the Bahai Library again.[534] She finished out the year still doing talks at the Bahai Library.[535]

January 1926 continued the same pattern of talks offered at the Bahai Library.[536] These continued into February,[537] but then there is a break until April.[538] She continued in May,[539] but there was then a break until December during which the old "Bahai Library" center was closed and a new center was opened at 116 W 49th St.[540]

Mary Hanford Ford is located in Manhattan earlier Bahai Libraryearlier Bahai Library Bahai Center(1)Bahai Center(1) Bahai Center(2)Bahai Center(2)
early Baha'i centers in New York City
She finished out the year speaking before the Pan American Commercial Congress which was attempting to reform the League of Nations focused on the Western Hemisphere,[541] the National Club for better movies,[542] and at the new Baha'i Center.[543] January 1927 began similarly at the new Center,[544] and in February,[545] though there was then a gap until April.[546] In May Ford was on radio station WGL (later bought by WADO) and she was cut off the air while speaking to a banquet audience of the All Nations Association, an international peace organization,[547] in praise of Amelia Gade Corson because the manager declared it, a pacifist talk according to him, "was not in line for the occasion".[548] The news of the action was carried by Associated Press and the story printed variously in the United States.[549][550][551] It was one of several incidents with that station.[552] Ford later released a statement:

The All Nations association for which i was speaking feels Denmark represents the ideal for which it is working, having created peace through disarmament, I said that as Mrs. Corson, a native of Denmark, had married an American, better feeling would be created between the two countries because of the fame of this woman."[553]

Congressman Emanuel Celler added the incident to his list of censorship of liberal views published in June.[554] In September Ford herself was in London, United Kingdom and other places giving talks,[555] and would most years circa 1921 to 1928 also go on to Italy.[556] But by October she was noted in New York talking at a race amity meeting.[557]

Ford next appears in February at another cite for the Bah' Center - 119 W 57th St.[558] Her next appearance is in April several times.[559] April also saw Ford publish another article on the Bah' Temple in Star of the West,[560] which was echoed in Bah' World volumes 3 and 4.[437] That September Ford returned to England for three weeks giving talks on the religion,[21] and went further - an International Peace Congress in Antwerp and then an International Esperanto Congress in Amsterdam.[561][562][563] Ford returned and gave roughly monthly talks in New York in October,[564] November,[565] and December.[566]

January 1929 begins with Ford giving a talk at the Bah' Center.[567] Ford also buys a subscription to The Crisis and communicated briefly with W. E. B. DuBois.[568] February Ford continues her monthly talks at the Baha'i Center,[569] and March.[570] In April she is a guest in Geneva, New York.[571] In May she was on a committee helping to host a "Peace Week" headed up by Edith Claire Bryce Cram of "Peace House"[572] as well as addressing the national Bah' convention in support of the Bah' Temple,[573] and wrote her own article covering the convention too.[574]

Ford was seemingly quiet from July until November when she again is giving a talk at the Bah' Center.[575] There is a break in her efforts again until February 1930 when she again gave talks at the Baha'i Center.[576] She continued at a rate of one a month in March,[577] and April,[578] though in April she was also scheduled in Madison, Wisconsin.[579] She also wrote a remembrance of her time at the exhibit of the Baha'i Temple model in New York.[481]

She gave talks in May at the Center,[580] and was visible as a signatory of the cablegram[581] of New York clergy supporting peace in India with the work of Gandhi[582] and his March Salt March. And she was noted renting an apartment from lower 2nd Ave.[583] In June she was listed starting a series of talks in London,[584] as well as submitted a paper to an Esperanto conference in August there.[585] Come October Ford is back giving a talk at the Baha'i Center in New York,[586] followed by one in November,[587] and then by one for a race amity conference,[588] as well as a followup at the Bah' Center in December.[589]

January 1931 begins with talks in the Bah' Center.[590] After a brief lapse she is visible helping to host meetings like for the Urban League in March,[591] as well as at the Bah' Center.[592] Talks of hers continue into April.[593]

During that Summer, her fifth in Britain, she spoke at the first public meeting of the religion in Bradford, Yorkshire.[21][594] Then at the end of the summer it is noted that Ford had chaired a group bringing in a diversity of speakers "represented art, music, drama, literature, current events and world peace" to the Bah' Center - Jean Anthony reported presenters across about a page of text in the August edition of Bah' News, the national newspaper of the religion for decades.[21][595] An article "The Bah' Temple" was published in Bah' World vol 3 published 1931.[596] It includes mentions of Ford's work at the Kevorkian Gallery in New York and the Art Institute in Chicago presenting the model of the Temple (note the article itself includes an excerpt from the article "Symbolism of the Bah' Temple" Ford wrote.)

Ford re-appeared in New York in October giving a talk at the Center,[597] and then in November.[598]

In New York meetings at the Bah' Center continued on Sundays through the year.[480] In February Ford spoke at another reception held by the Bah's in honor of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the New York Urban League as well as at Esperantist conferences.[599] Additionally, still in February, Ford gave a talk in New Jersey.[600]

In April Ford is noted giving more than one talk at the Center.[601] Still in April Ford was elected president of a vegetarian association in New York.[602] In May Ford spoke at a youth conference of a church group,[603] as well as at another church group,[604]

The British national assembly noted that in addition to her work in America among the 17 noted Bah's undertaking activities to promote the religion in the UK, she was singled out as being responsible for "the most outstanding teaching activity during the year".[599] Ford also spoke a few days after a Women's Peace Crusade at a Bah' followup.[605]

Ford is next visible in October when she gives a series of talks at the Center in New York.[606] In November she attended a banquet,[607] a meeting of the All-World Gandhi Fellowship,[608] and a gave a talk at the Center,[609] as well as another in Yonkers.[610] In December Ford again spoke at the Center.[611]

New England and the Central States in her last years[edit]
In January 1933 monthly talks by Ford begin with a regional conference of five communities held in Yonkers, New York.[612] In February she spoke at the Bah' Center,[613] March at a chapter of the Women's International League for Peace,[614] April to the All-Gandhi World Fellowship,[615] and then back at the Bah' Center,[616] May at the "World's Good Will Day" observance,[617] June back at the Bah' Center,[618] and in July,[619] before going on to give talks at Green Acre later in July[620] and a Race Amity conference there in August,[621] which is her last known appearance there. It was in July that she published recollections of her pilgrimage,[384] and this race amity conference was noted in the Baha'i News as well.[622][623] In August/September attended the 1933 World Parliament of Religions.[624] In October Ford was at the Chicago Century of Progress Exposition as one of the representatives of the national community,[625] as well as at a local community meeting in Toledo, Ohio.[626] In November she helped celebrate the Bah' Holy Day of the Birth of Bah'u'llh at the Bah' Center,[627] and then gave a talk another day.[628] In December she gave talks in Binghamton, New York a few nights[629] December also saw her publish an article on a portrait of `Abdu'l-Baha in Star of the West,[630] which was echoed in Bah' World vol 5.[437]

Early January 1934 begins with a talk at the Center,[631] and a week later.[632] In February Ford was with Ali Kuli Khan in Urbana, Illinois giving a series of talks,[633] followed by a visit with a presentation in Chicago and the Temple there.[634] In April Ford was back giving a monthly talk in the New York Bah' Center,[635][636] then in May,[637] and in June.[638]

That summer Ford is visible starting with Summer School classes and talks in late June for youth in the Central States[where?] followed by a general program into July.[639] Later Ford was in Milwaukee, Wisconsin in late September or early October,[640] and Binghamton, New York in November for a few talks,[641] then Syracuse, New York,[642] before returning to New York City area and its Center before the end of November.[643]

She doesn't appear at the New York Center after December 1934 until April 1935.[644]

For all the remarkable coverage of decades of appearances there are no known records of her after April 1935 until her death in 1937. She probably moved to Toledo, Ohio where her daughter lived.[9] The next entry in the Bah' News is notice of her death.[645] However she had been working on a book on the religion and facing the issue of industrial work conditions.[21] She died in Clearwater, Florida on 2 February 1937 with her daughter reporting her last words: It is so beautiful, Lynette, it is so very beautiful.[434]

Legacy[edit]
At a memorial for her a few days later in New York Ali Kuli Khan read a cable from then head of the religion, Shoghi Effendi:

Her unique and outstanding gifts enabled her to promote effectively the best interests of the Faith in its new-born and divinely-conceived institutions. I will pray for her soul from the depths of my heart. Her services will always be remembered and extolled.[21]

In 1944 Philip Leonard Green recalls encountering the religion by contact from Ford and her gift of her book "The World of Abdu'l-Baha".[521]

In 1947 in Italy a niece of a lady who had met Ford in 1910 was found - she recalled her aunt, Mrs. Max Schobert, had her two talks from Ford in 1910 and then met `Abdu'l-Bah.[646]

In 1950 the Bah's of Washington state asked the national assembly to re-issue Ford's Oriental Rose.[647]

In 1965 Ford's daughter Lynette Storm continued in the religion after her mother and was photographed with Margaret Ruhe commenting that her mother was at the 1893 Exposition and that she thought her mother had run into the religion there.[648][649]

In 1972 an excerpt of Ford's Oriental Rose was included in Annamarie K. Hannold's Glimpig Early Bah' Pilgirmages.[650]

In 1974 Bruce Whitemore published The Silent Teacher and noted her The Bah' Temple article in Bah' World vol iii.[651]

From Marzieh Gail's 1991 book, Arches of Years, "Mrs Ford was actually a premature 'sixties person', as her life and opinions clearly show. She, who had known poverty herself, stood for labor and the underdog. She, an intellectual, stood for beauty, art, the life of the mind."[355]

Ford's 1889 critique, A Feminine Iconoclast, originally published in The Nationalist was reprinted in Carol Farley Kessler's 1995 book, Daring to Dream: Utopian Fiction by United States Women Before, 1950.[652]

Bibliography[edit]
"A Feminine Iconoclast" The Natioanlist (November, 1889) pages 252-7.[652]
The Syndicate - A comedy-drama in four acts by Mary Palmer Reese and Mary Hanford Ford (1891).[653]
Mary Hanford Finney Ford (1891). Which Wins?: A Story of Social Conditions. Lee and Shepard.
Mary Hanford Ford (1895). Otto's Inspiration. S. C. Griggs.
Mary Hanford Finney Ford (1897). The Holy Grail: The Silent Teacher. Message of the Mystics. A.B. Stockham & Company.
Mary Hanford Finney Ford (1897). Goethe' Faust: Its Ethical Symbolism. Message of the Mystics. Alice B. Stockham & Company.
Mary Hanford Ford (1897). Balzac's Seraphita: The Mystery of Sex. Message of the Mystics. A. B. Stockham & Company.
Paul de Kock; trans. by Mary Hanford Ford (1904). The works of Charles Paul de Kock. The Frederick J. Quinby company.
Mary Hanford Finney Ford (1904). The Legends of Parsifal. H.M. Caldwell Company.
Mary Hanford Finney Ford (1910). The Oriental Rose: Or, The Teachings of Abdul Baha which Trace the Chart of "the Shining Pathway". Broadway Publishing Company.
Mary Hanford Ford (1915C1916). The World Of Abdul-Baha (PDF) (4th ed.). JJ Little and Ives Co, New York.
References[edit]
Jump up ^ Herringshaw's American Blue Book Of Biography. American Publishers' Association. 1915. p. 470.
Jump up ^ Tom Denardo (May 13, 2013). "Mary Hanford Finney Ford". Findagrave.com. Retrieved May 10, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Florence Khanum (Ruhaniyyihi) (1939). "Mary Hanford Ford (Nov. 1, 1856- Feb. 2, 1937)". Bah' World (PDF) 7 (BE 93 and 94, April 1936-1938 A.D. ed.). pp. 541C2.
^ Jump up to: a b "Mrs. Smith M. Ford dies, Mother of Roland H. Ford formerly lived here". Kansas City Star (Kansas City, Missouri). February 3, 1937. p. 5.
^ Jump up to: a b c William Arba Ellis (1911). Norwich University, 1819-1911: Her History, Her Graduates, Her Roll of Honor, Pub. by Major-General Grenville M. Dodge ... Capital city Press. p. 386.
Jump up ^ "Mary Hanford Edson (1833 - 1916)". Ancestry.com. Retrieved May 10, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Select school for girls". The Rutland Daily Globe (Rutland, Vermont). September 14, 1874. p. 3.
Jump up ^ John William Leonard; Albert Nelson Marquis (1901). Who's who in America. Marquis Who's Who. p. 390.
^ Jump up to: a b Nancy Truher (January 2, 2005). Jack Truher, ed. "Generation No. 5". Report on Ford Family. Retrieved May 10, 2015.
Jump up ^ "S. M. Ford, of the Kanses City Mail". Fort Scott Daily Monitor (Fort Scott, Kansas). October 8, 1878. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Carrie Westlake Whitney (1908). Kansas City, Missouri: Its History and Its People 1808-1908. S. J. Clarke publishing Company. pp. 398, 622.
Jump up ^ "Roland Ford, Sr., Dies: Former Treasurer of the Fred Harvey System Was 71". The Kansas City Public Library. November 9, 1950. Retrieved May 10, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Geo. S. Brown has returned". The Daily Commonwealth (Topeka, Kansas). February 19, 1882. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ *"The Social Science club at Kansas City". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). May 6, 1884. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"(continued)". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). May 6, 1884. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ *Mary H Ford (August 9, 1884). "What is wanted". Cedar Rapids Evening Gazette - 1884-10-09 (Cedar Rapids, Iowa). p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Mary H Ford (January 3, 1885). "What is wanted". The Perry Pilot (Perry, Iowa). p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Mary H Ford (January 3, 1885). "What is wanted". Perry Pilot (Perry, Iowa). p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Mary H Ford (January 16, 1885). "What is wanted". Alden Times (Alden, Iowa). p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * Mary H Ford (August 15, 1884). "What is wanted". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Mary H Ford (October 17, 1884). "What is wanted". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * Mary H Ford (August 10, 1884). "What is wanted". The Fort Wayne Journal-Gazette (Fort Wayne, Indiana). p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Mary H Ford (August 10, 1884). "What is wanted". Fort Wayne Gazette (Fort Wayne, Indiana). p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Mary H Ford (October 31, 1884). "What is wanted". New Harmony Register (New Harmony, Indiana). p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary H Ford (August 20, 1884). "What is wanted". Biddeford Daily Journal (Biddeford, Maine). p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary H Ford (October 2, 1884). "What is wanted". The Hicksville News (Hicksville, Ohio). p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * Mary H Ford (October 10, 1884). "What is wanted". Centralia Daily Sentinel (Centralia, Illinois). p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Mary H Ford (November 8, 1884). "What is wanted". Monmouth Evening Gazette (Monmouth, Illinois). p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e f g h i j k l Whitehead, O. Z. (1983). Some Baha'is to Remember. George Ronald. pp. 145C152. ISBN 0-85398-148-5.
Jump up ^ "Mary H. Ford contributes". Lawrence Daily Journal (Lawrence, Kansas). July 18, 1888. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "If the President's wife". The York Daily (York, Pennsylvania). September 24, 1888. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Author's meeting". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). October 21, 1888. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Notes; A club of Western authors and artists has been started". The Critic: a Weekly Review of Literature and the Arts 253: 224. November 3, 1888.
Jump up ^ "Gareth H. Ford - 1930 Census Record". mooseroots.com. Retrieved May 10, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Literature and art; The third semi-annual convention of the W. A. A. C. in Kansas City". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). September 24, 1889. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * M. H. Ford (August 1889). "The Message (poem)". The Nationalist 1 (4): 105. Retrieved April 28, 2015.
Mary H Ford (September 1889). "An artful incident". The Nationalist 1 (5): 141C144. Retrieved April 28, 2015.
Mary H. Ford (November 1889). "A Feminine Iconoclast". The Nationalist 1 (7): 252C257. Retrieved April 28, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary H. Ford (December 1889). "Painters, Portraits of Famous". The Dial 10 (116): 212C?.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford, of Kansas City,". Lawrence Daily Journal (Lawrence, Kansas). December 19, 1889. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The April Wide Awake,". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). March 23, 1890. p. 17. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Art Exhibition". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). March 29, 1891. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The bright and capable members". Fort Scott Daily Monitor (Fort Scott, Kansas). May 9, 1891. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mary, H. Ford, the author of 'Which Wins'". The Critic: a Weekly Review of Literature and the Arts 16 (394): 29. July 18, 1891.
Jump up ^ * "The Times has received". The Times (Clay Center, Kansas). May 14, 1891. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"A story for the times". Syracuse Evening Herald (Syracuse, New York). May 15, 1891. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Barbara A. Bardes; Suzanne Gossett (1990). Declarations of Independence: Women and Political Power in Nineteenth-century American Fiction. Rutgers University Press. p. 180. ISBN 978-0-8135-1500-7.
Jump up ^ * "Which wins?". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). May 16, 1891. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"For the Farmers' Alliance - Which wins? Mary H. Ford". Harrisburg Telegraph (Harrisburg, Pennsylvania). May 16, 1891. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Which wins? Mary H Ford". The San Francisco Call (San Francisco, California). May 17, 1891. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Through the courtesy". The Advocate (Meriden, Kansas). May 20, 1891. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
C. S. Gleed (May 31, 1891). "A brilliant book". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""Which Wins?" is a cleverly told story". The Universalist Quarterly and General Review 28: 378. July 1891.
Jump up ^ Charles E L Wingate (May 9, 1891). "Boston Letter". The Critic: a Weekly Review of Literature and the Arts 15 (384): 252.
Jump up ^ "Fiction: the "labor question" could be settled". The Literary World 22 (13): 224. June 20, 1891.
Jump up ^ * George Ward (28 May 1891). "Sound advice". The Daily Times (New Philadelphia, Ohio). p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
George Ward (May 28, 1891). "Sound advice". New Philadelphia Ohio Democrat (New Philadelphia, Ohio). p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
George Ward (June 4, 1891). "Sound advice". Osgood Ripley Journal (Osgood, Indiana). p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
George Ward (11 June 1891). "Sound advice". The Belleville Telescope (Belleville, Kansas). p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
George Ward (June 11, 1891). "Sound advice". Belleville Republic County Freeman (Belleville, Kansas). p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Gossip of authors and writers". Current Literature 8 (3): 36C347 (see pp. 344C345). November 1891. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
Jump up ^ "A new play by a Kansas City writer". Arkansas City Daily Traveler (Arkansas City, Kansas). November 19, 1891. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "The Syndicate". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 29, 1892. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Play by women - instantaneous hit by a recent production". The Saint Paul Globe (Saint Paul, Minnesota). January 29, 1892. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"A great hit - Kansas political life as seen on the stage at Kansas City". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). January 29, 1892. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"A great hit - Kansas political life as seen on the stage at Kansas City". The Leavenworth Weekly Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). February 4, 1892. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "More calamity". The Kansas City Gazette (Kansas City, Kansas). January 29, 1892. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"More calamity". The Kansas City Gazette (Kansas City, Kansas). February 4, 1892. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * May Belleville Brown (July 7, 1892). "A party of twenty-five ladies". The Saline County Journal (Salina, Kansas). p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
May Belleville Brown (July 7, 1892). "(continued)". The Saline County Journal (Salina, Kansas). p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Ex-Editor Ford sued for $50,000". The Evening Kansan (Newton, Kansas). March 15, 1893. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"An obliging husband". Independence Daily Reporter (Independence, Kansas). March 17, 1893. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"An obliging husband". Lawrence Weekly World (Lawrence, Kansas). March 16, 1893. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Sensation in Kansas City". The Sedalia Democrat (Sedalia, Missouri). April 2, 1893. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs Mary H. Ford,". The Kansas City Gazette (Kansas City, Kansas). March 22, 1893. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Women at the tabernacle - Mrs Ford addresses an interested audience on equal suffrage". The Kansas City Gazette (Kansas City, Kansas). March 23, 1893. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Equal suffragists organized - prepared to do effective work for women's rights". The Kansas City Gazette (Kansas City, Kansas). March 30, 1893. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary Ford of Kansas City". The Kansas City Gazette (Kansas City, Kansas). April 2, 1893. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Western artists and authors". The Piqua Daily Call (Piqua, Ohio). May 25, 1893. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Western Artists and Authors". San Antonio Daily Light (San Antonio, Texas). May 25, 1893. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "June programs for women". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). May 29, 1893. p. 3. Retrieved May 18, 2015.
"One day at the Exposition". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). June 28, 1893. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "World's Columbian Exposition news; Future events". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). June 21, 1893. p. 1. Retrieved May 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Old masters and the new". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 24, 1893. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary H. Ford (October 8, 1893). "The Impressionists Pictures at the Fair". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). p. 6. Retrieved May 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b c d * "Of interest to woman and home," (PDF). The Utica Daily Observer (Utica, New York). November 2, 1898. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Woman and Home" (PDF). Bath Plaindealer (Bath, New York). November 5, 1898. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Woman and Home" (PDF). Brooklyn Greenpoint Daily (Brooklyn, New York). November 12, 1898. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Woman and home". The Indiana Gazette (Indiana, Pennsylvania). December 28, 1898. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "About the studios - probably consolidation of the art societies of Chicago". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 3, 1893. p. 27. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Another picture with a history is one seen yesterday". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 31, 1893. p. 15. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arche Club". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 31, 1893. p. 15. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Archi Club's series of lectures". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). December 17, 1893. p. 26. Retrieved May 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "On Tuesday evening next ". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 21, 1894. p. 27. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Sons of the revolution - presentation of a Flag to the society - plaintera of early times". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 24, 1894. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Next Thursday afternoon". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 18, 1894. p. 27. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Will take them all in - the Art Institute decides upon a plan to extend its influence". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 24, 1894. p. 13. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will give a talk". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois)). March 21, 1894. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"An artistic affair - Entertainment at the home of Mrs. Strahan in Kenwood". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 25, 1894. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "It is delightful to know". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 25, 1894. p. 27. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The reception tended ". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). April 15, 1894. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Potter Palmer will". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). May 13, 1894. p. 27. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "A varied program of work". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). May 20, 1894. p. 42. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Literary Gossip; The same house will publish". Boston Post (Boston, Massachusetts). September 27, 1894. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The opening reception of the sixth season". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). October 6, 1894. p. 12. Retrieved May 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Out of the art world comes an author". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 18, 1894. p. 31. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (1895). Otto's Inspiration. S. C. Griggs.
Jump up ^ "The peculiar pathetic life of the famous French". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). December 1, 1894. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Catholic Women's League - Literary and musical entertainment at the Columbus Club". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 9, 1894. p. 15. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Rare lace and art - Arche Club's afternoon devoted to dainty affairs". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). December 15, 1894. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will lecture". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 7, 1895. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mrs. Mary Ford will talk". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 4, 1895. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Lecture on Trilby". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 10, 1895. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The first of a series ". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 8, 1895. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Young Ladie's Aid Society". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 12, 1895. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "The Arch club holds ". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 12, 1895. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Arche Club". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 16, 1895. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Arche Club (continued)". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 16, 1895. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Lecture on George Sand - Arche Club members listen to Mrs. Mary H. Ford and they enjoy a dance". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 19, 1895. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Tuesday evening members of the Arch Club". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 20, 1895. p. 22. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will give". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 20, 1895. p. 14. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Lecture on Millet". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 23, 1895. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arche Club held its weekly". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 26, 1895. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ ""Rosa Bonbeur and the Women Painters of France"". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 28, 1895. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mrs. Mary H. Ford is to give a course". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). February 8, 1895. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The regular meeting of the Chicago Culture Club". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 10, 1895. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford lectured". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). February 14, 1895. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "An entertainment for charity". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). February 15, 1895. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"This evening, at Emerson's Hall". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 16, 1895. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Menoken Club's popularity". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 20, 1895. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arch club held the last of a series". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). March 2, 1895. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will lecture". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). March 10, 1895. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ ""Salon Day" at the Arche club". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). March 26, 1895. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "A series of four recitals". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 21, 1895. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"A series of four recitals". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 24, 1895. p. 30. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The recital given by". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 29, 1895. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The recital given by". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 31, 1895. p. 30. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"A "Wagner" recital will be given". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). April 4, 1895. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs. Mary H. Ford and". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). April 12, 1895. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Last of the Recitals". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). April 18, 1895. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The women of the Social Circle of the People's Church". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). March 23, 1895. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Chicago Culture Club will hold". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). March 24, 1895. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Friday will be "Salon Day"". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 24, 1895. p. 31. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H Ford addressed". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 30, 1895. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Chicago artists should rise up". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 31, 1895. p. 31. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs Mary H. Ford will speak". Sterling Daily Gazette (Sterling, Illinois). April 4, 1895. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will give a talk". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). April 5, 1895. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. J. W. Nicholson". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). April 6, 1895. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford arrived". Sterling Daily Gazette (Sterling, Illinois). April 6, 1895. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Chicago Culture Club". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). April 14, 1895. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Young Ladies Aid Society". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). April 19, 1895. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ ""Women of the French Salons"". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). May 19, 1895. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Entertainments announced for the Diversion of the Fashionable World". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). May 26, 1895. p. 30. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Miss S. Ella Wood will sing". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). June 9, 1895. p. 37. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The World of Art". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). June 16, 1895. p. 35. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Notes & Annoucements; The Summerschool at Greenacre". The Arena 13 (2): 15C18. July 1895. Retrieved May 19, 2015.
"Life in Boston temporarily transferred to charming "Greenacre"". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). August 3, 1895. p. 10. Retrieved May 10, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arch club will". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). September 11, 1895. p. 16. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arche Club will". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). September 15, 1895. p. 30. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will be". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). September 22, 1895. p. 30. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Nearly 150 women attending". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 3, 1895. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arche Club". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 5, 1895. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Music, however, is only one note". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 12, 1895. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Chicago Culture Club will". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). October 14, 1895. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Early French Art". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 22, 1895. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "To Pose for Charity". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 20, 1895. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Model Lodging-House and Workshop for Women". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). October 28, 1895. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs Mary Ford will talk". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). October 28, 1895. p. 10. Retrieved May 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Fair days in society". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 1, 1895. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "In the rooms of the Woman's ". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 3, 1895. p. 29. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Chicago Culture Club will". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 10, 1895. p. 30. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 10, 1895. p. 30. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arche Club has become". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 10, 1895. p. 31. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The regular weekly meeting". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 16, 1895. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Chicago Culture Club will". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 17, 1895. p. 30. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Friday- The Arch club". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). November 24, 1895. p. 15. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "The Chicago Culture Club will". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 24, 1895. p. 34. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"A reception was held". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 1, 1895. p. 30. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Echoes from the Studios". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois)). December 1, 1895. p. 31. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Monday - The Culture club spends". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). December 8, 1895. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Announcement is made". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). December 22, 1895. p. 29. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ The Chicago blue book of selected names of Chicago and suburban towns. Chicago, Illinois: Chicago Directory Company. 1895. p. 150 (Langley Avenue).
Jump up ^ * "The Chicago Culture Club will". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 4, 1896. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Chicago Culture Club will". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 12, 1896. p. 26. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Chicago Culture Club will". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 2, 1896. p. 26. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ *"Chicago Culture Club - Holds a reception(continues)". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 5, 1896. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"(continued)". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 5, 1896. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Chicago Culture Club will". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 9, 1896. p. 26. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "At her home". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 11, 1896. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "A ladies afternoon entertainment". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 11, 1896. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Menoken Club - families of members are pleasantly entertained". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 12, 1896. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "With up-to-date women C "Silk Day" at Arche Club proves a success". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). February 15, 1896. p. 13. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""Silk day" was observed yesterday". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 16, 1896. p. 26. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "At the residence of". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 16, 1896. p. 26. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Culture club will meet". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). February 16, 1896. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mary H. Ford will inaugurate". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 18, 1896. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Chicago Opera House". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 21, 1896. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mrs. Ford's first lenten lecture". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). February 26, 1896. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Third Lenten Lecture". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). March 10, 1896. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Annual Salon of the Arche Club - entries number 200 pictures and pieces of sculpture". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). February 25, 1896. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mary H Ford will inaugurate". Oak Park Reporter (Oak Park, Illinois). February 21, 1896. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Chicago Culture club will". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). February 29, 1896. p. 14. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "How to dress artistically". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 1, 1896. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Chicago Culture Club - has an interesting meeting at Beek's Hall". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 3, 1896. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mary H. Ford's second popular lecture will". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 4, 1896. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mary H. Ford's series of popular". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 8, 1896. p. 38. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Chicago Culture club will". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). March 8, 1896. p. 26. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Matheon held a reception". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 15, 1896. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "The Chicago Ceramic Association will". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). March 19, 1896. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Chicago Culture club will". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). March 21, 1896. p. 13. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Massachusetts society's election". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). March 26, 1896. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Field and Riley - Mrs. Ford's lecture about two great men". Sterling Standard (Sterling, Illinois). April 2, 1896. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Ford's lectures". Bloomington Sunday Leader (Bloomington, Illinois). April 12, 1896. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Austin; The last ladies informal reception". Oak Park Reporter (Oak Park, Illinois). April 17, 1896. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Next Thursday evening". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). April 21, 1896. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Ellsworth collection in view - Exhibition of art for the benefit of vacation schools". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). May 17, 1896. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Herpolsheimer & Co". The Courier (Lincoln, Nebraska). June 27, 1896. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Talk on food and character - Mrs Mary H. Ford tells how and what to eat this weather". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). August 10, 1896. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Drawing in the schools - The Exhibit at the Art Institute will remain till Oct 3". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). September 10, 1896. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Art exhibit of the public schools". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). September 13, 1896. p. 21. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Praise art work of pupils - addresses on school drawings made at Art Institute". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). September 27, 1896. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Are sorry they married - Smith M Ford and others ask the Circuit Court for divorces". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). September 19, 1896. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arche Club's annual". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). September 27, 1896. p. 31. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. H. Ford will lecture on "Russia"". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). October 2, 1896. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Emma Playter Seabury (October 11, 1896). "A Kansas City woman in art". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Chicago Culture Club - holds an interesting session at its rooms". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 13, 1896. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Society of Art was favored". Fort Wayne Sentinel (Fort Wayne, Indiana). October 26, 1896. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The members of the Arch club". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). November 17, 1896. p. 3. Retrieved May 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs Mary H. Ford will lecture". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 29, 1896. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs Mary Ford delivered her". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). December 2, 1896. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The young women of the Wildwood Club". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 6, 1896. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ ""American Poets" was the subject". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). December 20, 1896. p. 42. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Chicago Culture Club - has an interesting session in the afternoon". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 29, 1896. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 27, 1896. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will speak". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 3, 1897. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ *"A most enjoyable program me (continues)". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 3, 1897. p. 26. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"(continued)". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 3, 1897. p. 26. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "April 1. Mrs. Mary H. Ford's lecture". Sterling Standard (Sterling, Illinois). January 7, 1897. p. 14. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will lecture". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 17, 1897. p. 26. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * Mary Hanford Finney Ford (1897). The Holy Grail: The Silent Teacher. Message of the Mystics. A.B. Stockham & Company.
Mary Hanford Finney Ford (1897). Goethe' Faust: Its Ethical Symbolism. Message of the Mystics. Alice B. Stockham & Company.
Mary Hanford Ford (1897). Balzac's Seraphita: The Mystery of Sex. Message of the Mystics. A. B. Stockham & Company.
Jump up ^ John Barry Marino (2004). The Grail Legend in Modern Literature. DS Brewer. p. 122. ISBN 978-1-84384-022-0.
Jump up ^ "lectures by Mrs. Ford - a series of six talks announced on "The Universal Ministry"". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 20, 1897. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Independent Penwomen's Club will meet". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 23, 1897. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Dr. Alice B. Stockham". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 23, 1897. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arch club will hold". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 28, 1897. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "The Beacon Lights have engaged". Goshen Daily News (Goshen, Indiana). February 1, 1897. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Beacon Lights have engaged". Goshen Daily News (Goshen, Indiana). February 2, 1897. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Beacon Lights have engaged". Goshen Daily News (Goshen, Indiana). February 3, 1897. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Beacon Lights have engaged". Goshen Daily News (Goshen, Indiana). February 5, 1897. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mrs. Lucy Burnham commits suicide - former newspaper writer of Chicago is found dead in her room at Starke, Fla.". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). February 10, 1897. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Tired of life". Fort Wayne Gazette (Fort Wayne, Indiana). February 10, 1897. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The well-known lecture". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 14, 1897. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "The second series of talks". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 19, 1897. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs. Mary H. Ford's lecture". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 5, 1897. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The third musicale of the season". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 12, 1897. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "A colonial reception was held". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 28, 1897. p. 30. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Englewood Woman's Club met". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 7, 1897. p. 30. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The course tickets for clubs". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). March 14, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The members of the Arche Club held their annual". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 14, 1897. p. 30. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will lecture". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). March 14, 1897. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will give her". Goshen Daily News (Goshen, Indiana). March 17, 1897. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will lecture". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 17, 1897. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mrs. Ford's lectures - they will begin Thursday at the Academy of Music - Great interest shown". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). March 31, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Members of the East Side Literary Society". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). March 31, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs. Mary H. Ford, of Chicago". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). April 2, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""Colour" was her theme - Mrs. Mary H. Ford entertains a large audience at the third of her series of lectures". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). April 8, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""The Holy Grail" - subject of Mrs. Mary H. Ford's fifth lecture at the Academy of Music yesterday afternoon". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). April 11, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "A number of charming social functions". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). April 1, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs. Mary H. Ford will be the guest". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). April 7, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford has consented". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). April 11, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Hugh L. McElroy opened". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). April 14, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Ford's final lecture". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). April 15, 1897. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Club news". Lawrence Daily Journal (Lawrence, Kansas). April 28, 1897. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. A. M. Finney and Mrs. W. B. Taylor". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). April 15, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Smith Moses Ford Divorced - separated from his wife on the grounds of abandonment". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). April 22, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will arrive in Kansas City". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). May 18, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Music and drama". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). May 30, 1897. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Fairmont Chautauqua opens". Daily Iowa Capital (Des Moines, Iowa). June 2, 1897. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford, who will be". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). June 3, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "At the last regular meeting". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). June 4, 1897. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "The Chautauqua Association is sparing". Cedar Falls Semi Weekly Cedar Falls Gazette (Cedar Falls, Iowa). June 8, 1897. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"After the closing lecture". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). June 9, 1897. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ North-western Christian Advocate. Swormstedt & Poe. 1897. p. 16.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Eliza Tirrell, of Manchester, reads a paper". Waterloo Daily Courier (Waterloo, Iowa). July 8, 1897. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Women's council and round table.". Waterloo Daily Courier (Waterloo, Iowa). July 9, 1897. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford of Chicago". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). August 22, 1897. p. 13. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arche club has an". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 2, 1897. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The next ladies' afternoon of the". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 17, 1897. p. 38. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "In the cause of art". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 26, 1897. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arche club held its regular". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 7, 1897. p. 38. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mary H. Ford delivered a lecture". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 20, 1897. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Message of the Mystics". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). November 22, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "A series of social conferences". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 25, 1897. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Arch club - Lecture on". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). November 29, 1897. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mrs. Mary H. Ford spoke". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 5, 1897. p. 39. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""Don Quixote and the Spanish Ideal"". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 16, 1897. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""Don Quixote and the Spanish ideal"". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 19, 1897. p. 43. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Four sessions to be held in Kenwood beginning Wednesday". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 13, 1897. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Influence of modern art - Mrs. Mary H. Ford delivers an address in Ryder Chapel". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 5, 1897. p. 17. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arche club - is addressed by Mrs. Mary H. Ford on Ruskin". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 18, 1897. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Under the general title of "Message of the Mystics"". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). December 18, 1897. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * ""The Message of the Mystics" (continues)". The Kinsley Graphic (Kinsley, Kansas). December 24, 1897. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015. * "(continued)". The Kinsley Graphic (Kinsley, Kansas). December 24, 1897. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Theme is "The Holy Grail" - Mrs Mary H. Ford addresses the Noonday Rest Club". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 6, 1898. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Literary Clubs - Third annual meeting of the Missouri Federation". The Sedalia Democrat (Sedalia, Missouri). January 9, 1898. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Tuesday Morning club". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 17, 1898. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford gave her seventh". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 27, 1898. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs. Mary H. Ford gave her seventh". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 30, 1898. p. 35. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs. Mary H. Ford gave". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 3, 1898. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs. Mary H. Ford gave her seventh art". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 6, 1898. p. 35. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Take up New York". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). January 21, 1898. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford addressed". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 10, 1898. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Michael Angelo - Twin city literary clubs hear of the artist". Benton Harbor Evening News (Benton Harbor, Michigan). February 11, 1898. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Michael Angelo". The News-Palladium (Benton Harbor, Michigan). February 11, 1898. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Englewood Woman's club". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). February 20, 1898. p. 34. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford, of Chicago". Fort Wayne Sentinel (Fort Wayne, Indiana). February 24, 1898. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford". Sterling Standard (Sterling, Illinois). February 24, 1898. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ *"Yesterday afternoon was social". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 24, 1898. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Ryder Memorial". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 27, 1898. p. 20. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford lectured". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 5, 1898. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will lecture". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 12, 1898. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Seventy-five guests". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 13, 1898. p. 37. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will give a talk on ANimal and Landscape Painters". Fort Wayne Journal (Fort Wayne, Indiana). March 20, 1898. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will deliver". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). April 10, 1898. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Wicker Park Culture club". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). April 10, 1898. p. 39. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Society of Art will meet". The Fort Wayne Sentinel (Fort Wayne, Indiana). April 12, 1898. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The lecture, to be given by Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford". Marshall Daily Chronicle (Marshall, Indiana). April 25, 1898. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The federation of clubs of Topeka Kas.". The Courier (Lincoln, Nebraska). May 7, 1898. p. First Edition. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will lecture". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). May 17, 1898. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Chicago Art association". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). May 29, 1898. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Aloha sent". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). June 20, 1898. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Local Chronology - July 8 Mrs. H. Ford". Waterloo Daily Reporter (Waterloo, Iowa). July 8, 1898. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Jane Cunningham Croly (1898). The History of the Woman's Club Movement in America. H. G. Allen & Company. pp. 376C378, 381C383.
Jump up ^ * "They Bathe on the beach". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). August 31, 1898. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Kenwood's younger set gave a corn roast". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). September 2, 1898. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Ghost of John Lane". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). September 4, 1898. p. 25. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Spook's odd antics". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois)). September 25, 1898. p. 35. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The programme of the Hull House Woman's club". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). September 2, 1898. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Hull House Woman's club". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). September 29, 1898. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "For the season of 1898C99 the Arche club". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). September 15, 1898. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Season's work of the Arche club". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). September 15, 1898. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs. L. E. Burr of No. 4017". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 9, 1898. p. 15. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will give". The Courier (Lincoln, Nebraska). October 1, 1898. p. First Edition. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Hull House Woman's club". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 3, 1898. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The free lecture course". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 5, 1898. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "As seen in dreams". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 6, 1898. p. 26. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "As seen in dreams". Altoona Tribune (Altoona, Pennsylvania). November 8, 1898. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b "Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford". Appeal to Reason (Girard, Kansas). November 24, 1898. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mary H. Ford delivered". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). November 8, 1898. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arche study class". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 19, 1898. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "A charity Thanksgiving pound party". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). November 20, 1898. p. 37. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The programme for Mrs. Garrigues' charity pound party". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 22, 1898. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"An event of Tuesday was". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 27, 1898. p. 18. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "There will be an enjoyable affair". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 25, 1898. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "FridayC Lecture on". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). November 28, 1898. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will address". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 1, 1898. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Wednesday - Chicago Woman's club". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). December 5, 1898. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Arch club held". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 10, 1898. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Rosalie hall was aglow". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 17, 1898. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Lecture at Hull House". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 8, 1898. p. 13. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "What happened in the city twenty four years ago". Fort Wayne News Sentinel (Fort Wayne, Indiana). December 13, 1922. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Phidian art club lecture". Dixon Evening Telegraph (Dixon, Illinois). December 31, 1898. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Lecture on American Art". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 7, 1899. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Chicago Literary Score". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 8, 1899. p. 28. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The subject for the literary meeting". The Nebraska State Journal (Lincoln, Nebraska). January 15, 1899. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Hull House Club Election". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 2, 1899. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Stories of Holy Grail". Benton Harbor Weekly Palladium (Benton Harbor, Michigan). February 17, 1899. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The fifth lecture in the course". Dixon Evening Telegraph (Dixon, Illinois). February 23, 1899. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford, who will be heard". Fort Wayne Journal (Fort Wayne, Indiana). February 27, 1899. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The members of the Society of Art enjoyed". Fort Wayne Sentinel (Fort Wayne, Indiana). March 3, 1899. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford spoke". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 4, 1899. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The members of the Society of Art". Fort Wayne Sentinel (Fort Wayne, Indiana). March 6, 1899. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "An evening with Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 12, 1899. p. 26. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford lectured". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). March 14, 1899. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Wednesday - Meeting of the United Study". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). March 20, 1899. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The sixth and last lecture by Mrs. Mary H. Ford". Dixon Evening Telegraph (Dixon, Illinois). March 23, 1899. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "South Side society crowded Rosalie hall". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). April 4, 1899. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The current literature department outlined". The Leader-Democrat (Springfield, Missouri). April 6, 1899. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford lectured". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). April 14, 1899. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Artists form trust". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). April 25, 1899. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford lectured". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). April 30, 1899. p. 35. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Announcements". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). May 14, 1899. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Menu for Wednesday". Logansport Pharos-Tribune (Logansport, Indiana). July 18, 1899. p. 19. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "A literary afternoon". Dubuque Daily Herald (Dubuque, Iowa). August 4, 1899. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford, of Chicago". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). August 31, 1899. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Ruskin as a thinker". Dubuque Daily Herald (Dubuque, Iowa). October 10, 1899. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Chicago Culture club will hold". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 15, 1899. p. 18. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arche club". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 21, 1899. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Art Congress opens today". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 24, 1899. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford spoke". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). November 19, 1899. p. 18. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Ford's Lecture". Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Missouri). November 22, 1899. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Phidian at Club". Dixon Evening Telegraph (Dixon, Illinois). September 30, 1899. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Laura Dainty Pelham No. 425". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 12, 1899. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Ford's Ghost Story". New-York Tribune (New York, New York). January 7, 1900. p. 29. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arche club will meet". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 19, 1900. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Independent Penwoman's club will". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 21, 1900. p. 18. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Arch club will meet". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 21, 1900. p. 38. Retrieved May 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The song unsung". New York Times (New York, New York). February 11, 1900. p. 22. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "There will be a lecture on William Dean Howells". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 11, 1900. p. 30. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Arch club". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). February 12, 1900. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Chicago Culture club will". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). February 25, 1900. p. 18. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Thursday- The Society of Art will". The Fort Wayne Sentinel (Fort Wayne, Indiana). March 12, 1900. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mr. and Mrs. W. P. Cooper last evening". The Fort Wayne Sentinel (Fort Wayne, Indiana). March 16, 1900. p. 3. Retrieved May 20, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary Ford, of Chicago,". The Fort Wayne News (Fort Wayne, Indiana). March 16, 1900. p. 4. Retrieved May 20, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Illinois club women in the Ninth district". The Courier-Journal (Louisville, Kentucky). April 22, 1900. p. 29. Retrieved May 20, 2015.
Jump up ^ "End of the Second Annual meeting at Dixon, Ill.". Freeport Journal-Standard (Freeport, Illinois). April 27, 1900. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Phibian art lecture". Dixon, Illinois. April 28, 1900. p. 5. Retrieved May 20, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary Ford will speak". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). April 29, 1900. p. 33. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Lecture on Color". Freeport Daily Journal (Freeport, Illinois). May 23, 1900. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Lecture on color". Freeport Daily Journal (Freeport, Illinois). June 1, 1900. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Lecture on color". Freeport Daily Journal (Freeport, Illinois). June 4, 1900. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Reception for Mrs. Ford". Freeport Daily Journal - 1900-06-04 - Freeport , United States Of America (Freeport, Illinois). June 4, 1900. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Lecture on color". Freeport Daily Journal (Freeport, Illinois). June 6, 1900. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Harriet C. Towner (June 1900). "Iowa". Official proceedings of the Fifth Biennial of the General Federation of Women's clubs (June 4C9, 1900) (John Bornman & Son): 85C87. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Kenosha misses Abdel Karin". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 14, 1900. p. 33. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Babist leader to lecture". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). October 19, 1900. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Teach new religion - two apostles of doctrine of Manifestation in City". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 16, 1900. p. 67. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mrs. Mary H. Ford, popular club lecturer". Oak Park Vindicator (Oak Park, Illinois). October 12, 1900. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The first of a series of monthly evening meeting of the Soul Culture Club". Oak Park Vindicator (Oak Park, Illinois). October 19, 1900. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The first of a series of monthly evening meeting of the Soul Culture Club". Oak Park Vindicator (Oak Park, Illinois). October 26, 1900. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary H. Ford's Reading". Kansas City Star (Kansas City, Missouri). November 13, 1900. p. 1.
Jump up ^ "The first of a series of three lectures". Bloomington Weekly Pantagraph (Bloomington, Illinois). November 16, 1900. p. 15. Retrieved May 21, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford of Chicago". Sedalia Evening Sentinel (Sedalia, Missouri). November 18, 1900. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Eleanor Gridley (1907) [1900]. "Introduction". The story of Abraham Lincoln; or, The journey from the log cabin to the White House. pp. 3C4.
Jump up ^ * "Seeks a haunted house". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). January 22, 1901. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Finds a 'Haunted House' - Police captain O'Neill responds to Mrs. Stewart". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 23, 1901. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Ghosts dwell in Chicago". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 27, 1901. p. 45. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Where the ghost walks". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 27, 1901. p. 45. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ University of Chicago (1900). University Record. University of Chicago Press. p. 298.
Jump up ^ Annual Register Vol 1 No 8. 1901. pp. 208C209.
Jump up ^ University of Chicago (1900). Annual Register. 1893-1930. pp. 196C198.
Jump up ^ "Afternoon Session - Henry H. Jessup, D. D., Makes an eloquent and instructive address". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). September 24, 1893. p. 2. Retrieved April 20, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Dr. Charles Cuthbert Hall". The Hutchinson News (Hutchinson, Kansas). February 28, 1900. p. 3. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The late Mrs. Carlina E. Haskell, of Michigan City". New-York Tribune (New York, New York). May 12, 1900. p. 8. Retrieved April 20, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Scholarships, Fellowships, Lectureships, and Prizes; Building for a long future: The University of Chicago and its Donors, 1889-1930". The University of Chicago Library. Retrieved May 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Religions of the world - series of lectures to be given by Dr. Tompkins". Belvidere Daily Republican (Belvidere, Illinois). November 12, 1900. p. 2. Retrieved April 20, 2015.
Jump up ^ *"Teach new religion". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 16, 1900. p. 67. Retrieved April 20, 2015.
"Teachers from Akka". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). January 27, 1901. p. 32. Retrieved April 20, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Smith Moses Ford". The Kansas City Gazette (Kansas City, Kansas). April 11, 1901. p. 1. Retrieved April 20, 2015.
"Smith Moses Ford, a well known". Atchison Daily Globe (Atchison, Kansas). April 12, 1901. p. 4. Retrieved April 20, 2015.
Jump up ^ "132 St 273 West". The New York Times (New York, New York). July 4, 1901. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b c * Lillian Gray (June 22, 1901). "Sarah Farmer and the Greenacre cult". The Wilkes-Barre Record (Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania). p. 12. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Lillian Gray (June 22, 1901). "Sarah Farmer and the Green Acre Cult". Evening Report (Lebanon, Pennsylvania). p. 6. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Lillian Gray (June 23, 1901). "Sarah Farmer and the Greenacre Cult". The Fort Wayne Journal-Gazette (Fort Wayne, Indiana). p. 11. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Lillian Gray (June 23, 1901). "Sarah Farmer and the Greenacre cult". San Antonio Express (San Antonio, Texas). p. 14. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Lillian Gray (June 23, 1901). "Sarah Farmer and the Greenacre cult". The Pittsburgh Press (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania). p. 16. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ Richardson, Robert P. (March 1931). "The Rise and Fall of the Parliament of Religions at Greenacre". The Open Court 45 (3): 129C166. Retrieved November 4, 2014.
Jump up ^ James T. Bixby (December 1897). "Babism and the Bab". The New World; A quarterly review of religion, ethics, and theology 6 (24): 722C750. Retrieved May 22, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Mary Hanford Finney Ford (1910). The Oriental Rose: Or, The Teachings of Abdul Baha which Trace the Chart of "the Shining Pathway". Broadway Publishing Company.
Jump up ^ "Conference School of Comparative Religion". Cambridge Tribune (Cambridge Massachusetts). May 11, 1901. p. 5. Retrieved June 1, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Robert H. Stockman (1985). The Bah' Faith in America: Early expansion, 1900-1912. Bah' Pub. Trust. pp. 80, 145C147, 190. ISBN 978-0-85398-388-0.
^ Jump up to: a b c * "Peculiar faith of the Babist sect as revealed by a woman". The Inter Ocean (Chicago, Illinois). December 1, 1901. p. 48. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
"Visit to the Babist Chief" (PDF). The Sun (New York, New York). November 24, 1901. p. 6. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Came on the Minnehaha". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). June 24, 1901. p. 24. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ The Bah'i centenary, 1844-1944: a record of America's response to Bah'o'llh's call to the realization of the oneness of mankind, to commemorate the one hundredth anniversary of the birth of the Bah'i faith. Bah' publishing committee. 1944. pp. 212C214.
Jump up ^ * "Greenacre Inn will closes". The Portsmouth Herald (Portsmouth, New Hampshire). September 10, 1901. p. 6. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
"Miss Sarah J Farmer". The Portsmouth Herald (Portsmouth, New Hampshire). September 28, 1901. p. 6. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ Alexander, Agnes Baldwin (1977). Barbara Sims, ed. History of the Bah' Faith in Japan 1914-1938. Osaka, Japan: Japan Bah' Publishing Trust. p. 21.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Marzieh Gail (1991). Arches of the Years. Ronald. pp. see chapters 7, 9, 27, 45. ISBN 978-0-85398-325-5.
Jump up ^ Marzieh Gail; Ali-Kuli Khan (31 December 1987). Summon up remembrance. G. Ronald. pp. 191, 193, 281. ISBN 978-0-85398-259-3.
Jump up ^ "A series of 10 talks". Boston Daily Globe (Boston, Massachusetts). October 27, 1901. p. 38. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "During six months,". Boston Post (Boston, Massachusetts). November 10, 1901. p. 15. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "What is Babism?". The Literary Digest 25 (2): 53C54. January 11, 1902. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ Kenneth R. Forbes (January 1902). "What is Babism?". Mind 9 (4): 271C276. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "The novels, tales, and vaudevilles of Charles". New York Times (New York, New York). February 1, 1902. p. 28. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Of all the surprising literary revivals". The Times (Philadelphia, Pennsylvania). March 22, 1902. p. 16. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Apotheosis of P. de Kock.". New York Times (New York, New York). June 5, 1902. p. 25. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Writings of Paul de Kock" (PDF). The New York Herald (New York, New York). February 8, 1903. p. 15. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Preach a new religion - Persian Missionaries seek converts in New England". The Rising Son (Kansas City, Missouri). September 25, 1903. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Preach a new religion - Persian Missionaries seek converts in New England". The Olsburg Gazette (Olsburg, Kansas). October 2, 1903. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs Mary Hanford Ford of Boston will give". Boston Globe (Boston, Massachusetts). November 1, 1903. p. 85. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Stockman, Robert (1986). "Notes, 1903-1904". American Baha'i History, 1892-1912 - Robert Stockman's Notes in the National Bah' Archives. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. L. W. Higgins gave a very fine program". The Kinsley Graphic (Kinsley, Kansas). March 11, 1904. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Finney Ford (1904). The Legends of Parsifal. H.M. Caldwell Company.
Jump up ^ ""Parsifal" Legends - some forthcoming novels - new editions". New York Times (New York, New York). March 26, 1904. p. 21. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Legends of Parsifal". New York Times (New York, New York). April 2, 1904. p. 35. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Strenuous Epigrams of Theodore Roosevelt. The Legends of Parsifal". Brooklyn Life (Brooklyn, New York). June 25, 1904. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Legend of Parsifal" (PDF). The Syracuse Herald (Syracuse, New York). July 10, 1904. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Books and Magazines; "The Legends of Parsifal"," (PDF). The New York Dramatic Mirror, (New York, New York). August 6, 1904. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"To the much that has been written". The San Francisco Call (San Francisco, California). August 14, 1904. p. ? First Edition. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"(continued)". The San Francisco Call (San Francisco, California). August 14, 1904. p. ? First Edition. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Parsifal Legends" (PDF). The New York Press (New York, New York). August 20, 1904. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Parsifal; Guileless Fool". The Washington Post (Washington, District of Columbia). September 17, 1904. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Legends of Parsifal". The Houston Post (Houston, Texas). November 27, 1904. p. 42. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Timely publications". Kansas City Daily Gazette (Kansas City, Kansas). December 9, 1904. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Two other recent little books," (PDF). The Evening Post (New York, New York). December 24, 1904. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Paul de Kock (1904). The works of Charles Paul de Kock. The Frederick J. Quinby company.
Jump up ^ "New Literature". Boston Daily Globe (Boston, Massachusetts). May 6, 1904. p. 16. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Persian weds American Girl - Bostonian is bride of Ali Kuli Khan, oriental mystic". The Indianapolis News (Indianapolis, Indiana). October 31, 1904. p. 7. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Lethren club will". Boston Daily Globe (Boston, Massachusetts). December 8, 1904. p. 26. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Lethren club held a meeting". Boston Daily Globe (Boston, Massachusetts). December 11, 1904. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b "To leave for Persia". The Portsmouth Herald (Portsmouth, New Hampshire). April 2, 1906. p. 4. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ The Arch Club. Yearbook. 1904-1905. Chicago, Illinois: Arch Club. 1905. p. 34.
Jump up ^ Mary H. Ford (August 1906). "American Art Eminently Distinctive". Brush and Pencil 18 (2): 61C63. doi:10.2307/25504032. JSTOR 25504032.
Jump up ^ * "Magazine Notes" (PDF). Niagara Falls Gazette (Niagara Falls, New York). December 19, 1906. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"In the field of Literature; Success". The Argus 56 (38) (Rock Island, Illinois). November 30, 1906. p. 4. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ Hanford Ford, Mary (December 1906). Orison Swett Marden; Robert MacKay, eds. "Love enough for all". Success Magazine (New York, New York) 9 (151): 852C853. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (November 1906). Samuel Carson, ed. "Country Life in North Carolina". Overland Monthly 48 (5): 489C494. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ Bourgeois, Jean-Baptiste Louis (1856-1930) - Designer of Mashriqu'l-Adhkar at Wilmette, Illinois, United States of America, R. Jackson Armstrong-Ingram, Research Notes in Shaykhi, Babi and Baha'i Studies, Vol. 1, no. 7 (September, 1997)
Jump up ^ * "University Notes". Lawrence Daily Journal (Lawrence, Kansas). January 9, 1907. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs Mary Hanford Ford will speak". Lawrence Daily World (Lawrence, Kansas). January 10, 1907. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford lectures". Lawrence Journal World (Lawrence, Kansas). January 11, 1907. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "For Art Exhibit". Lawrence Daily World (Lawrence, Kansas). February 26, 1907. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"For art exhibit". Lawrence Daily World (Lawrence, Kansas). February 26, 1907. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (February 2, 1907). Louis Freeland Post; Alice Thatcher Post, eds. "House-mother vs Home-mother". The Public 9 (461): 1045C1046. Retrieved May 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Program for the state Meeting". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). April 21, 1907. p. 15. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"For State meeting - Kansas Federation of women's clubs to be here". The Kansas City Kansas Globe (Kansas City, Kansas). April 27, 1907. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Mary Hanford Ford (July 1933). "An Interview with `Abdu'l-Baha". Star of the West 24 (4). pp. 103C107. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Executive board of city federation met". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). January 8, 1908. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. J. C. Merine". The Kansas City Star (Kansas City, Missouri). January 19, 1908. p. 20. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "City Federation will meet". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). February 2, 1908. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Federation is opposed to bill boards". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). February 7, 1908. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs Hanford Ford will lecture here". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). February 9, 1908. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Art committee will meet". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). February 16, 1908. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs Ford of Kansas City will lecture here". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). March 1, 1908. p. 13. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs Ford's lectures". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). March 8, 1908. p. 13. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Board of Directors of city federation will meet". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). March 11, 1908. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Worrall Hudson (March 26, 1908). "Mrs. Ford's Lectures". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mrs Ford tells of French architecture". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). March 27, 1908. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"(continued)". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). March 27, 1908. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Selena M. Crosson (June 2013). Searching for May Maxwell:Bah Millennial Feminism, Transformative Identity & Globalism in the new World Order Shaping Womens Role in Early Bahi Culture 1898-1940 (PDF) (Thesis). Department of History University of Saskatchewan Saskatoon, SK, Canada. pp. 45, 93, 115C116. Retrieved May 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ Robert Stockman (1986). "American Baha'i History, 1892-1912 - Robert Stockman's Notes in the National Bah' Archives". Research Notes. Retrieved May 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ "A friend gave the tip". The Kansas City Times (Kansas City, Missouri). September 4, 1908. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Parlor talks". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). November 26, 1908. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Parlor talks". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). November 27, 1908. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "George R. Barse's great painting, "The Awakening"". The Kansas City Times (Kansas City, Missouri). December 4, 1908. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mrs. Ford's talks". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). January 1, 1909. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs. Mary Ford Lectured". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). January 13, 1909. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Talk". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). January 24, 1909. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs. Mary H. Ford's". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). January 31, 1909. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Parlor talk". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). February 23, 1909. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Talk". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). February 9, 1909. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Ford's Talks". The Leavenworth Post (Leavenworth, Kansas). 23 Feb 1909. p. 5. Retrieved July 21, 2015.
"Mrs. Ford's talk". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). February 27, 1909. p. 5. Retrieved Nov 24, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Tuesday". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). March 7, 1909. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Talk". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). March 14, 1909. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Parlor talk". The Leavenworth Times (Leavenworth, Kansas). March 20, 1909. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Women diners elect Mrs. Ford". The Kansas City Times (Kansas City, Missouri). June 22, 1909. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Votes for women soon will be cry on the East side" (PDF). The New York Press (New York, New York). December 30, 1909. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Belmont is East Side Guest - Presides at lively meeting of Wage Earners Organization for Equal Rights," (PDF). New York Herald (New York, New York). December 30, 1909. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "About Mrs. Ford". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). February 15, 1910. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Oriental Rose". Star of the West 1 (12). October 16, 1910. pp. 9C10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Isabella D. Brittingham (March 21, 1910). "New York City". Star of the West 1 (1). pp. 17C18. Retrieved April 28, 2015.
Jump up ^ Sloan, John. New York Scene. Transaction Publishers. p. 414. ISBN 978-1-4128-4929-6.
Jump up ^ "Marvels of Abdul Baha" (PDF). The Illustrated Buffalo Express (Buffalo, New York). April 30, 1910. p. 16. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Ella C. Quant. (June 5, 1910). "Johnstown, NW". Star of the West 1 (5). p. 14. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Sunday's post magazine". Pittsburgh Daily Post (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania). July 13, 1910. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (July 17, 1910). "An Equivocation on "Matter"" (PDF). Buffalo Courier (Buffalo, New York). p. 13. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Wendi Momen (2012). Iraj Ayman, ed. "`Abdul-Bahs Encounter with Modernity During His Western Travels" (PDF). Lights of Irfn 13: 273C307. ISBN 978-3-942426-12-1. Retrieved May 10, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (November 23, 1911). "With Abdul-Baha in Paris". Star of the West 2 (14,). pp. 3C10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "It is possible to so adjust, Words of Abdul-Baha from notes of Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford, taken in Paris, France, 1911,". Star of the West 7 (18). February 7, 1917. p. 188. Retrieved May 19, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (March 17, 1912). "Abdul Baha, head of new religion, coming here". The Sun (New York, New York). p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Philosophy aids Marshall Black in jail". Oakland Tribune (Oakland, California). February 2, 1913. p. 23. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Ellen Cole (December 2007). "Women's Suffrage An introduction to primary resources in Glasgow University Library's Special Collections - 1914: Mary Richardson damages Wallace Collection painting with an axe". Glasgow University Library's Special Collections. Retrieved May 10, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Dominic Casciani (October 3, 2003). "Spy pictures of suffragettes revealed". BBC News. Retrieved May 10, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Militants accuse members as spies". New York Times (New York, New York). April 26, 1913. p. ?. Retrieved May 3, 2015.
Jump up ^ Elizabeth Crawford (2 September 2003). The Women's Suffrage Movement: A Reference Guide 1866-1928. Routledge. pp. 1454C1457. ISBN 1-135-43401-8.
Jump up ^ * "Ask for Laughlin's head". The New York Times (New York, New York). April 4, 1913. p. 2. Retrieved May 20, 2015.
"Emerson girl's friends score first success". Reading Times (Reading, Pennsylvania). April 4, 1913. p. 10. Retrieved May 20, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Court-Martial to try American Suffragette" (PDF). Atlanta Constitution (Atlanta, Georgia). April 26, 1913. p. 11?. Retrieved May 3, 2015.
"Women holding court martial". The Bisbee Daily Review (Bisbee Arizona). April 26, 1913. p. 1. Retrieved May 3, 2015.
"The accused conspicuous by absence". Altoona Tribune (Altoona, Pennsylvania). April 26, 1913. p. 1. Retrieved May 3, 2015.
"Treason in the militant camp". The Coffeyville Daily Journal (Coffeyville, Kansas). April 26, 1913. p. 1. Retrieved May 3, 2015.
"Suffrage court-martial called" (PDF). Morning Oregonian (Portland Oregon). April 26, 1913. p. 1. Retrieved May 3, 2015.
"Court martial for American Suffragette". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania). April 26, 1913. p. 1. Retrieved May 3, 2015.
"Court martial for American Suffragette". The Gazette Times (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania). April 26, 1913. p. 1. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
"Traitor in the militant camp". The Montreal Gazette (Montreal, Ontario). April 26, 1913. p. 1. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
"Miss Kenny up on ancient law," (PDF). The Saratogian (Saratoga Springs, New York). April 26, 1913. p. 3. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Oh, Girls! She's a traitor". The Evening Star (Independence, Kansas). April 26, 1913. p. 4. Retrieved May 3, 2015.
Jump up ^ "London suffragettes out of jail try American sister for treason". The Fort Wayne Journal-Gazette (Fort Wayne, Indiana). April 26, 1913. p. 1. Retrieved May 3, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Militants try an American". Boston Evening Transcript (Boston, Massachusetts). April 26, 1913. p. 4. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ Janet Painter (January 2012). "Emmeline Pankhurst, 1858-1928; The Suffragette Movement and Her Connection to Epsom". Epsom and Ewell Local and Family History Centre. Retrieved May 10, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Suffragette Headquarters (continued)". Fort Wayne Daily News (Fort Wayne, Indiana). April 30, 1913. p. 12. Retrieved May 20, 2015.
"Raided suffs headquarters". The Winfield Daily Free Press (Winfield, Kansas). April 30, 1913. p. 1. Retrieved May 20, 2014.
"Suffrage talks now mean jail". The Washington Times (Washington, District of Columbia). April 30, 1913. p. 1. Retrieved May 20, 2015.
"Headquarters of militants raided". The Evening Missourian (Columbia, Missouri). April 30, 1913. p. 1. Retrieved May 20, 2015.
"Raid opens war on suffragettes". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). May 1, 1913. p. 12. Retrieved May 3, 2015.
"Writer declares barbaric cruelty is lot of suffragettes in British prisons". Oakland Tribune (Oakland, California). May 11, 1913. p. 10. Retrieved May 3, 2015.
Jump up ^ Joseph H. Hannen (June 5, 1913). "Public meetings of the Fifth Annual Convention of Bahai Temple Unity, New York City, April 26-29, 1913". Star of the West 4 (5). pp. 83C86,(see pp. 85C86). Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Teaching of Immortality" (PDF). The Yonkers Statesman (Yonkers, New York). June 23, 1913. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Duane L. Herrmann (2002). "'Abdu'l-Baha Writes to Kansas City". bahai-library.com. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "To talk of war". Pittsburgh Daily Post (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania). September 20, 1914. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Ceremonies at the official reception given to the International Bahai Congress by the Directorate of the Panama-Pacific International Exposition in Festival Hall, Exposition Grounds, Saturday, April 24, 1915,". Star of the West 6 (4). May 17, 1915. p. (see pp. 30C34; 38). Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Corrections". Star of the West 6 (6). June 24, 1915. p. 49. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
`Abdu'l-Bah; trans Mirza Ahmad Sohrab (September 8, 1916). ""Truly I say the believers of God in that Congress",". Star of the West 7 (10). p. 95. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b c d "The Baha'i World Contents of Volumes I through XX in chronological order Ridvan 1924 through Ridvan 1992" (pdf). Bahai-Library.com. 27 October 2012. Retrieved May 19, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (June 5, 1915). "The Feast of Rizwan, at the home of Mrs. Helen S. Goodall, Oakland, Ca, April 21, 1915". Star of the West 6 (5). pp. 35C37. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Lectures to stimulate art love". Oakland Tribune (Oakland, California). October 6, 1915. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mr. and Mrs. Roland Ford have returned". Kansas City Times (Kansas City, Missouri). October 19, 1915. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Exposition art is theme of lectures". Oakland Tribune (Oakland, California). November 1, 1915. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Society hears a message of peace". Oakland Tribune (Oakland, California). November 13, 1915. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "New architecture created by West(at beginning and end of article)". Oakland Tribune (Oakland, California). January 20, 1916. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Lecture on art". Oakland Tribune (Oakland, California). February 14, 1916. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b "Attend lecture". Oakland Tribune (Oakland, California). May 11, 1916. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mrs. Ford's lecture". Oakland Tribune (Oakland, California). March 5, 1916. p. 42. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs Ford's lecture". Oakland Tribune (Oakland, California). March 19, 1916. p. 14. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The death of Mrs Finney". The Gazette Globe (Kansas City, Kansas). March 27, 1916. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Child actors will present charming play". Berkeley Daily Gazette (Oakland, California). April 29, 1916. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford". The Washington Post (Washington, District of Columbia). September 28, 1916. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"(continued)". The Washington Post (Washington, District of Columbia). September 28, 1916. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Among the peace organizations". The Advocate of Peace (World Affairs Institute) 78 (11): 342C344. December 1916. JSTOR 20667669.
Jump up ^ "$1,000,000 Bahai Temple". Riverdale Pointer (Dolton, Illinois). November 17, 1916. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ *"Address to Bahai Assembly The Washington Post(Washington, District of Columbia)21 Jan 1917, Sun ? Page [Blank]". Washington Post (Washington, D.C.). January 21, 1917. p. 38. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Free Religious Association of America". Boston Post (Boston, Massachusetts). March 3, 1917. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (March 21, 1917). "The economic teaching of Abdul-Baha". Star of the West 8 (1). pp. 3C7; 11C16. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Friends of Abdul Baha" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). April 14, 1917. p. 20. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mashrak-el-Azkar Convention and Bahai Congress". Star of the West 8 (9). August 20, 1917. p. 105. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn New York). May 26, 1917. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Ford's Talk". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). August 4, 1917. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Noonday meetings". Oakland Tribune (Oakland, California). January 19, 1918. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Gives lecture". Oakland Tribune (Oakland, California). March 20, 1918. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "What is doing to-morrow". Oakland Tribune (Oakland, California). April 6, 1918. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Realm of Music". Oakland Tribune (Oakland, California). April 7, 1918. p. 33. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Gertrude Canconnon to open music school". The Sun (Pittsburg, Kansas). December 29, 1918. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs. Mary H. Ford will give the last in a series". Kansas City Times (Kansas City, Kansas). January 10, 1919. p. 22. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mrs. Mary H. Ford will give". Kansas City Times (Kansas City, Kansas). February 11, 1919. p. 27. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Talks to art guild". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). February 23, 1919. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"(continued)". The Topeka Daily Capital (Topeka, Kansas). February 23, 1919. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * Joseph H. Hannen (May 17, 1919). "(program - Reception and Feast of El-Rizwan - Tablet - Woman's Station in this Great Day, read by Mary Hanford Ford, ) The Convention of Abdul-Baha". Star of the West 10 (4). p. (see p. 55). Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Louis Gregory (May 17, 1919). "Opening of the Convention and Congress - the Feast of El-Rizwan". Star of the West 10 (4). p. ( see pp. 56C58). Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (August 20, 1919). "To Live the Life". Star of the West 10 (9). pp. 182C183; 186C189. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford of New York," (PDF). Buffalo Evening News (Buffalo, New York,). July 28, 1919. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Local Bahaists hear address by noted exponent". The Sandusky Register (Sandusky, Ohio). August 12, 1919. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Extension study club". The Sun (Pittsburg, Kansas). September 20, 1919. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs Ford to speak on teaching of Abdul Boha(sic)". Daily Illini (Urbana, Illinois). October 11, 1919. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai SS. John Hall". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). October 12, 1919. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford left yesterday". Kansas City Times (Kansas City, Kansas). November 7, 1919. p. 18. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "A most interesting meeting". Hutchinson News (Hutchinson, Kansas). December 19, 1919. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Will gives lectures - Mrs. Mary H. Ford will give these next month". The Hutchinson News (Hutchinson, Kansas). December 31, 1919. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "The Apollo Club will not meet". Hutchinson News (Hutchinson, Kansas). January 3, 1920. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Interested in Russia?". Hutchinson News (Hutchinson, Kansas). January 8, 1920. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Lectured at Sterling". Hutchinson News (Hutchinson, Kansas). January 8, 1920. p. 15. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Ten years ago in 1920". Hutchinson News (Hutchinson, Kansas). January 11, 1930. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Famous artist speaks Friday". The Hutchinson News (Hutchinson, Kansas). January 14, 1930. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Harlan Foster Ober (February 7, 1920). "Minutes of the Eleventh Annual Mashrekol-Azkar Convention (continued),". Star of the West 10 (18). p. (see p. 334). Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai meetings" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). February 21, 1920. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "St. Mark's-in-the-Bouwerle" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). April 24, 1920. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Louis Gregory (May 17, 1920). "Twelfth Annual Mashrekol-Azkar Convention and Bahai Congress". Star of the West 11 (4). p. (see p. 63). Retrieved April 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Hussein Ahdieh (January 29, 2012). "Highlights of the first 40 years of the Bah' Faith in New York, City of the Covenant - 1892C1932" (pdf). Local Spiritual Assembly of the Bah's of New York City. Retrieved May 23, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Shahnaz Waite (April 1930). "The Mashriqu'l-Adkhr in America". Star of the West 21 (1). pp. 7C17. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mary Hanford Ford (letter)". Star of the West 11 (9). August 20, 1920. pp. 149C150. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "On Thursday night, the Rainbow Circle". The New York Age (New York, New York). July 31, 1920. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "First Emmanuel Church". The New York Age (New York, New York). December 11, 1920. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "High honor for Rev. R. M. Bolden". Indianapolis Recorder (Indianapolis, Indiana). March 4, 1916. p. 1. Retrieved May 9, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Church News; First Emmanuel Church". The New York Age (New York, New York). May 14, 1921. p. 7. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Persian Pilgrim's Pen Pictures". The Portsmouth Herald (Portsmouth, New Hampshire). June 18, 1921. p. 7. Retrieved January 21, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Church News; First Emmanuel Church". The New York Age (New York, New York). July 23, 1921. p. 7. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Church News; First Emmanuel Church". The New York Age (New York, New York). August 6, 1921. p. 7. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ "At 3:30pm Mrs. Mary H Ford". The New York Age (New York, New York). August 20, 1921. p. 7. Retrieved May 19, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Rainbow Circle held". The New York Age (New York, New York). August 20, 1921. p. 7. Retrieved May 19, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Church News; First Emmanuel Church". The New York Age (New York, New York). September 10, 1921. p. 7. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ "A new center". Reality 4 (10): 51. October 1921. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Church News; First Emmanuel Church". The New York Age (New York, New York). December 10, 1921. p. 2. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Church News; First Emmanuel Church". The New York Age (New York, New York). January 7, 1922. p. 7. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Church News; First Emmanuel Church". The New York Age (New York, New York). February 18, 1922. p. 8. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Bahai to sponsor interracial dinner in New York City" (PDF). The Pittsburgh Courier (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania). March 12, 1922. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (January 1921). "Claude Bragdon on the Fourth Dimension". Reality 3 (1): 23C24, 29C31. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (February 1921). "The Great Memorial of George Grey Barnard". Reality 3 (2): 35C39. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (June 1921). "The Current Art". Reality 4 (7): 20C23. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (July 1921). "Symbolism of the Temple". Reality 4 (7): 14C18. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (July 1921). "The Current Art". Reality 7 (4): 29C31. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (August 1921). "The Current Art". Reality 4 (8): 29C31. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (September 1921). "The Current Art". Reality 4 (9): 27C29. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ Eleanro R. Ingraham (3 October 1909). "Portraits of well known people". San Francisco Call (San Francisco, California). p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (October 1921). "The Current Art". Reality 4 (10): 33C36. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (November 1921). "The Current Art". Reality 4 (11): 33C36. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (December 1921). "The Current Art". Reality 4 (12): 41C44. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ Charles Edwin Hewes (1922). Songs of the Rockies. Egerton-Palmer Press. pp. 197C198.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (23 November 1923). "Tribute to Lathrop Ripley" (PDF). Estes Park Trail 3 (13) (Estes Park, Colorado). Retrieved April 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b "Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford". Reality 3 (5): 43. May 1921. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford". Reality 3 (4): 43. April 1921. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b c Peter Smith (1984). "Reality Magazine:Editorship and Ownership of an American Bah' Periodical". From Iran East and West: Studies in Babi and Bah' History 2: 135C156. Retrieved May 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (August 1922). "Meditation and its effect upon conduct". Star of the West 13 (5). pp. 109C110. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Chicago Culture Club". Oak Park Oak Leaves (Oak Park, Illinois). April 14, 1923. p. 70. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "At Green Acre". Portsmouth Herald (Portsmouth, New Hampshire). July 9, 1923. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"At Green Acre". Portsmouth Herald (Portsmouth, New Hampshire). July 11, 1923. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Inspirational Church of divine thought" (PDF). The Sun and the Globe (New York New York). February 16, 1924. p. 15. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai Library" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). August 23, 1924. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The force behind the new civilization" (PDF). New York Evening Post (New York, New York). November 15, 1924. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mary Hanford Ford to lecture before Woman's Advance Club" (PDF). The Daily Review (Long Island, New York). November 26, 1924. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Advance Club to hear Miss M. H. Ford" (PDF). The Daily Review (Long Island New, York). December 10, 1924. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b "May 24". Baha'i News. September 1944. p. 17. Retrieved May 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai Lecture" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). January 3, 1925. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai Lecture" (PDF). The New York Times, (New York, New York). January 3, 1925. p. 24. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai Lecture" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). January 24, 1925. p. 28. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai Lecture" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). January 31, 1925. p. 23. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "New Hindu Religious Center" (PDF). New York Post (New York, New York). January 5, 1925. p. 14. Retrieved May 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Worldwide unity of Races and Religions" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). February 7, 1925. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015. * "Bahai Lecture" (PDF). The new York Times (New York, New York). February 7, 1925. p. 27. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""The Divine art of Living"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). February 21, 1925. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai Lecture" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). February 21, 1925. p. 21. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai Lecture" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). February 28, 1925. p. 24. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * ""Success and reality"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). March 7, 1925. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""The new ideals of the New Age"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). March 21, 1925. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai Lecture" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). March 21, 1925. p. 17. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""The new vision of immortality"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). March 28, 1925. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Bahai Lecture" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). April 11, 1925. p. 16. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""Ideals and Spiritual happiness"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). April 18, 1925. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai Lecture," (PDF). The New York Times, (New York, New York). April 18, 1925. p. 18. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Co-operation in its fullest form" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). April 25, 1925. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai Library" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). April 25, 1925. p. 19. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (April 1925). "The new feeling of brotherhood". Star of the West 16 (1). p. 395. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Bahai Lecture" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). May 2, 1925. p. 13. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""The divine economics of the new age"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). May 9, 1925. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai Lecture" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). May 9, 1925. p. 18. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"The Bahai Temple" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). May 16, 1925. p. 23. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai Lecture" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). May 16, 1925. p. 20. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""The abolition of religious prejudice"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). May 23, 1925. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai Lecture" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). May 23, 1925. p. 19. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""The unity of East and West"" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). May 30, 1925. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ ""How to recognize the perfect master"" (PDF). The New York Sun. June 6, 1925. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "News of the Chicago Women's Clubs: Arche Club Opens Its 37th Season". Chicago Daily Tribune (Chicago, Illinois). September 27, 1925. p. E8.
Jump up ^ * "Bahai Library" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). October 17, 1925. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai - "The Temple"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). October 24, 1925. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Members of all creeds pay tribute to Judaism". Charleston Daily Mail (Charleston, West Virginia). October 27, 1925. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Many faiths pay tribute to Judaism". Kokomo Tribune (Kokomo, Indiana). October 27, 1925. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Many cults met to pay tribute". Sedalia Capital (Sedalia, Missouri). October 28, 1925. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Many cults met to pay tribute". San Antonio Express (San Antonio, Texas). October 28, 1925. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ William C. Hartman (November 1925). Hartmann's Who's Who in Occult, Psychic and Spiritual Realms,, , p. 11 (PDF). The Occult Press. p. 11.
Jump up ^ * "Bahai - "What you can do with prayer"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). November 7, 1925. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai Library" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). November 7, 1925. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai - "The Fivefold Path to the City of God"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York New York). November 14, 1925. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai Library" (PDF). The New York Times. November 14, 1925. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai - "The United States of the World"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). November 28, 1925. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Bahai Library" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). December 5, 1925. p. 16. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"How to be happy always" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). December 12, 1925. p. 13. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai Library" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). December 12, 1925. p. 18. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""When will Christmas come?"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). December 26, 1925. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Jesus and Moses; the Expressed Word of God" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). January 9, 1926. p. 13. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""What is an open mind?"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). January 30, 1926. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * ""How to get the most out of life"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). February 27, 1926. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * ""Two worlds in one"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). April 3, 1926. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
""The opportunity of life"" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). April 17, 1926. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Bahai Library" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). May 15, 1926. p. 24. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Bahai - New Baha'i Centre". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). December 4, 1926. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai - New Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). December 4, 1926. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Pan-American Bid to Canada Likely" (PDF). The New York Times (New York, New York). December 14, 1926. p. 26. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Movie stars to radion from WPCH" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). December 18, 1926. p. Radio Section, p. 31. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "New Baha'i Centre". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). December 24, 1926. p. 3. Retrieved June 2, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai - New Baha'i Centre". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). January 8, 1927. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Bahai - New Bahai Centre" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). February 12, 1927. p. 17. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai - New Bahai Centre" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). February 19, 1927. p. 25. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
*"Bahai - New Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn New York). February 19, 1927. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Bahai - New Baha'i Centre". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). April 2, 1927. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "All Nations Association presented with statue". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). November 19, 1929. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Pacifist talk hushed by radio station WGL: Mrs. Mary H. Ford's address at farewell to Mrs. Corson is cut off the air". New York Times (New York, New York). May 3, 1927. p. 23. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Willis Kingsley Wing, ed. (December 1927). "The Freedom of the Air". Radio Broadcast 12 (2): 117. Retrieved May 10, 2015.
Jump up ^ Douglas B. Craig (July 7, 2005). Fireside Politics: Radio and Political Culture in the United States, 1920-1940. JHU Press. p. 114. ISBN 978-0-8018-8312-5.
Jump up ^ Benjamin, Louise M. Freedom of the Air and the Public Interest. SIU Press. p. 139. ISBN 978-0-8093-8803-5.
Jump up ^ * "Radio speaker gets "the air"; Mrs. Mary Ford cut off after launching into pacifist argument". Lowell Sun (Lowell, Ohio). May 3, 1927. p. 20. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Pacifist halted at radio station". Decatur Review (Decatur, Illinois). May 3, 1927. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Switches "Mike" on pacifist talk, music drowns out speech". Emporia Gazette (Emporia, Kansas). May 3, 1927. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Radio speaker gets "the air"; Mrs. Mary Ford cut off after launching into pacifist argument". Lowell Sun (Lowell, Massachusetts). May 3, 1927. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Stops pacifist broadcast". Portsmouth Herald (Portsmouth, New Hampshire). May 3, 1927. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Broadcast cut off as speech turns pacifist". Oakland Tribune (Oakland, California). May 3, 1927. p. 19. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Broadcast cut off as speech turns pacifist". Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, California). May 3, 1927. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Stopped pacific speech of Mary H. Ford in New York". Jefferson City Tribune Post (Jefferson City, Missouri). May 5, 1927. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Radio speech is interrupted". The Ogden Standard-Examiner (Ogden, Utah). May 4, 1927. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Radio speech is interrupted; Alleged pacifist pleas cut short by station manager". Ogden Standard Examiner (Ogden, Utah). May 4, 1927. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Bill Jaker; Frank Sulek; Peter Kanze (1 May 1998). The Airwaves of New York: Illustrated Histories of 156 AM Stations in the Metropolitan Area, 1921-1996. McFarland. p. 77. ISBN 978-0-7864-3872-3.
Jump up ^ "Woman's pacifist speech cut off". The Spokesman-Review (Spokane, Washington). May 4, 1927. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Robert Mack (June 8, 1927). "Congressman aroused by censorship on the air; cites "Horrible" example". Portsmouth Daily Times (Portsmouth, Ohio). p. 14. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Urges Unity; Mary Hanford Ford". The Billings Gazette (Billings, Montana). September 28, 1927. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ http://bahai-library.com/savi_encyclopedia_italy Italy: History of the Bah' Faith by Julio Savi 1992
Jump up ^ * "Bahais Urge Racial Amity at Annual Meet". The Chicago Defender (Chicago, Illinois). October 22, 1927. p. 2.
"Racial Amity Urged". The Pittsburgh Courier (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania). October 29, 1927. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "At the afternoon service tomorrow". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). February 18, 1928. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"(Three stories) A Fellowship of Faiths meeting will, (and) At the afternoon serice tomorrow, (and) Baha'i Centre," (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). February 18, 1928. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"A Fellowship of Faiths meeting". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). February 18, 1928. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Bahai - Baha'i Centre". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). April 21, 1928. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). April 21, 1928. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Free Class" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York New York). April 28, 1928. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (April 1928). "The Bah' Temple". Star of the West 19 (1). pp. 18C22. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mrs Ford in England". Baha'i News. September 1928. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Martha L. Root (November 1928). "International Congresses use Esperanto - Dear Fellow-workers:". Star of the West 19 (8). p. (see p. 243). Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Martha L. Root (December 1928). "Disarmament of Minds". Star of the West 19 (9). pp. 270C274. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Free - Four special Baha'i lectures". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). October 27, 1928. p. 15. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn New York). October 27, 1928. p. 18. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Bahai Centre" (PDF). New York Evening Post (New York, New York). November 24, 1928. p. 7F. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). November 24, 1928. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Bahai - Baha'i Centre". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). December 22, 1928. p. 26. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). December 22, 1928. p. A7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). January 12, 1929. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai Centre" (PDF). The New York Sun. January 26, 1929. p. 28. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn New York). January 26, 1929. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * Mary Hanford Ford (January 11, 1929). "Letter from Mary H. Ford to W. E. B. Du Bois". W. E. B. Du Bois Papers. Special Collections & University Archives, University of Massachusetts Amherst. Retrieved May 10, 2015.
W. E. B. Du Bois (January 17, 1929). "Letter from W. E. B. Du Bois to Mary H. Ford". W. E. B. Du Bois Papers. Special Collections & University Archives, University of Massachusetts Amherst. Retrieved May 10, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Bahai - Baha'i Centre". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). February 2, 1929. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn New York). February 9, 1929. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn New York). March 9, 1929. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Personals; Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford of New York City" (PDF). Geneva Daily Times,. April 16, 1929. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Peace Week Celebration" (PDF). New York Evening Post. May 2, 1929. p. 15. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Louis Gregory (May 1929). "Report of the Twenty-first annual convention". Baha'i News. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (July 1929). "Impressions of the Baha'i Convention". Star of the West 20 (4). pp. 124C125. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai - Baha'i Centre". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). November 2, 1929. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Bahai - Baha'i Centre". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). February 1, 1930. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn New York). February 1, 1930. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). March 1, 1930. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn New York). April 5, 1930. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mrs. F. O. Pennington (December 31, 1929). "League of Voters is making a creative raid on indifference". Madison Capital Times. p. 26. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ *"Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). May 3, 1930. p. 14. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). May 17, 1930. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Indian Pamphlets call for Revolt (continued from page one)" (PDF). New York Evening Post (New York, New York). May 10, 1930. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "102 Clergy of U.S. cable MacDonald for peace in India" (PDF). New York Evening Post (New York, New York). May 10, 1930. p. 1. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Renting from plans" (PDF). New York Evening Post (New York, New York). May 31, 1930. p. 8F. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Program of meetings - London, England". Baha'i News. July 1930. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ A. Evelyn Baxter (November 1930). "A Universal Language - Which?". Star of the West 21 (9). pp. 254C256. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn New York). October 25, 1930. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai - Baha'i Centre". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). November 15, 1930. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Urban League and Baha'is of NY conference". The Chicago Defender (Chicago, Ill). November 22, 1930. p. 2.
Jump up ^ "Mrs. Bethune was guest of Foreign Study Club" (PDF). The New York Age. December 20, 1930. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Baha'i - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). January 17, 1931. p. 8a. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Baha'i meeting held at Urban League building". The New York Age (New York, New York). March 14, 1931. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai - Baha'i Centre". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). March 21, 1931. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Baha'i - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). April 18, 1931. p. 57. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). April 18, 1931. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Baha'i activities in other lands; London". Baha'i News. September 1931. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Afternoon Tea Talks at the New York Baha'i Center". Baha'i News. August 1931. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ The Bah'i World(big download), Baha'i World, Volume 3, BE 85C86, 1928-1930AD, published 1931: The Bah' Temple by Mary Hanford Ford,(pp. 151C154), The Mashriqu'l-Adhkar in America by Shahnaz Waite (pp. 142C149, see pp 144C5, 147)
Jump up ^ "Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). October 17, 1931. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn New York). November 14, 1931. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Horace Holley (1935). "Survey of current Baha'i activities in the East and the West". Baha'i World (PDF) 7. pp. 60C61, 64, 70, 71, 73. Retrieved May 11, 2015.1935?
Jump up ^ "New Jersey". Baha'i News. March 1932. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "E. B. Kinney will speak tomorrow" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). April 2, 1932. p. 15. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Dr. Genevieve Coy will speak". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). April 9, 1932. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mary Hanford Ford will speak". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). April 16, 1932. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The vegetarian Faith to thrive and convince". Chicago Packer (Chicago, Illinois). April 23, 1932. p. 14. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Youth to hear its task outlined at conference at St. Andrew's" (PDF). The Herald Statesman (Yonkers, New York). May 11, 1932. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Dance is 'Divine' expression, Ruth St. Denis tells youth" (PDF). The Herald Statesman (Yonkers, New York). May 21, 1932. p. 2. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Florence E. Pinchon (November 1932). "Wings over Europe". Star of the West 23 (8). p. 250. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Mary Hanford Ford will speak". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). October 15, 1932. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mary Hanford Ford will speak". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). October 29, 1932. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mary Hanford Ford will speak" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). October 29, 1932. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Holiday services in many Churches; Mass meeting at Union Auditorium" (PDF). New York Evening Post (New York, New York). November 19, 1932. p. 10F. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "All-World Gandhi Fellowship" (PDF). New York Evening Post (New York, New York). November 21, 1932. p. 15. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Pianist is heard at Bahai meeting" (PDF). The Herald Statesman (Yonkers, New York). November 21, 1932. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai Assembly to hear Mrs. Ford" (PDF). The Herald Statesman (Yonkers, New York). November 29, 1932. p. 16. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mary Hanford Ford will speak". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). December 24, 1932. p. 17. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai Assemblies gather tomorrow for session here," (PDF). The Herald Statesman (Yonkers, New York). January 27, 1933. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "A New Social Order" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). February 18, 1933. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Peace League to hear Bahai cult member" (PDF). Long Island Daily Press (Long Island, New York). March 10, 1933. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Testimonial luncheon to Swami Bodhananda" (PDF). New York Evening Post (New York, New York). April 22, 1933. p. 14 F. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Baha'i" (PDF). New York Evening Post (New York, New York). April 29, 1933. p. 9F. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Good will day being observed at meeting" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). May 18, 1933. p. 29. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mary Hanford Ford will speak" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). June 3, 1933. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mary Hanford Ford will speak" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn New York). July 15, 1933. p. 9. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Green Acre Notes". Portsmouth Herald (Portsmouth, New Hampshire). 1933-07-25. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Conference at Green Acre great success". Portsmouth Herald (Portsmouth, New Hampshire). 1933-08-01. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Important Inter-Racial Amity Activities". Baha'i News. September 1933. p. 4. Retrieved May 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ "New Visions of Human Unity". Baha'i News. February 1934. p. 11. Retrieved May 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ Carlos Hugo Parra (2012). Standing with Unfamiliar Company on Uncommon Ground: The Catholic Church and the Chicago Parliaments of Religions (PDF) (Thesis). Education Ontario Institute for Studies in Education University of Toronto. p. 142. Retrieved May 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Baha'i Representation at World Fellowship of Faiths". Baha'i News. October 1933. p. 3. Retrieved May 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Toledo, Ohio, Spiritual Assembly". Baha'i News. October 1933. p. 6. Retrieved May 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Hooper Harris, Mary Hanford Ford and" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn New York). November 11, 1933. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "David Eugene Smith, Horace Holley". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). November 25, 1933. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "World Bahai lecturer to give lecture here" (PDF). Binghamton Press (Binghamton, New York). December 5, 1933. p. 13. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs. Ford will speak Friday night on 'Jesus and Bahai Revelation'" (PDF). Binghamton Press (Binghamton, New York). December 6, 1933. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford is the guest" (PDF). The Bringhamton Press (Binghamton, New York). December 9, 1933. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Mary Hanford Ford (December 1933). "The Portrait of `Abdu'l-Baha". Star of the West 24 (9). pp. 276C277. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ ""The Bab - His Spiritual Message" will be" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York, New York). January 6, 1934. p. 31. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The Bahai Message explained by" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). January 11, 1934. p. 28. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Urbana". Baha'i News. February 1934. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Chicago". Baha'i News. February 1934. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Temple Program". Baha'i News. January 1935. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mary Hanford Ford will speak". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). April 14, 1934. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Current Activities: The New York Assembly". Baha'i News. September 1934. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). May 5, 1934. p. 6. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mary Hanford Ford will speak". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). June 2, 1934. p. 5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Central States Summer Schools". Baha'i News. April 1935. pp. 4C5. Retrieved April 18, 2015.[
Jump up ^ "Milwaukee Public Meetings". Baha'i News. January 1935. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ * "Binghamton". Baha'i News. March 1935. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai teacher to speak in hotel here on Friday" (PDF). Binghamton Press (Binghamton, New York). November 6, 1934. p. 7. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mrs. Mary Hanford Ford will speak here tonight" (PDF). Binghamptom Press (Binghamptom, New York). November 9, 1934. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai movement still continues, asserts speakers" (PDF). Binghamton Press (Binghamptom, New York). November 10, 1934. p. 11. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Bahai woman hits Capitalism" (PDF). Syracuse Journal (Syracuse, New York). November 12, 1934. p. 20. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "New York". Baha'i News. April 1935. p. 16. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"At the meeting of the Baha'i Centre" (PDF). The New York Sun (New York New York). November 24, 1934. p. 12. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Bahai - Baha'i Centre" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). December 1, 1934. p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
"Mary Hanford Ford will speak". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). December 22, 1934. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mary Hanford Ford will speak". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, New York). April 6, 1935. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "In Memoriam". Baha'i News. March 1937. p. 3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Italy (Condensation of a letter from Rome by Ugo Giachery)". Baha'i News. October 1947. p. 10. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Washington (decisions of the national assembly from reports of state conventions)". Baha'i News. May 1950. p. 4. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Baha'i in the News; Mrs Lynette Storm (left), Toledo, Ohio". Baha'i News. August 1965. p. 15. Retrieved April 18, 2015.[
Jump up ^ Eugene Gauger (June 4, 1965). "Baha'i Faith unites diverse groups". Toledo Blade (Toledo, Ohio). p. 8. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Pilgrimage began in the days of Bah'u'llh". Baha'i News. October 1972. pp. 2C3. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ Bruce Whitmore (November 1974). "The Silent Teacher (footnotes)". Baha'i News. pp. 6C16 (see p. 16). Retrieved April 18, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Carol Farley Kessler (January 1995). Daring to Dream: Utopian Fiction by United States Women Before, 1950. Syracuse University Press. pp. 104C108. ISBN 978-0-8156-2655-8.
Jump up ^ Library of Congress. Copyright Office (1891). Catalog of Copyright Entries. U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 14.
Further reading[edit]
Duane L. Herrmann (2002). "'Abdu'l-Baha Writes to Kansas City". bahai-library.com. Retrieved April 18, 2015.
Whitehead, O. Z. (1983). Some Baha'is to Remember. George Ronald. pp. 145C152. ISBN 0-85398-148-5.
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 107922301 LCCN: n2010011511 ISNI: 0000 0000 7749 3430 GND: 1056133562
Categories: 1856 births1937 deaths20th-century Bah'sAmerican Bah'sAmerican women writersConverts to the Bah' Faith
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
Languages
Add links
This page was last modified on 19 July 2016, at 21:42.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
 This is a featured article. Click here for more information. Page semi-protected Listen to this article
Barack Obama
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Barack" and "Obama" redirect here. For his father, see Barack Obama Sr. For other uses of "Barack", see Barack (disambiguation). For other uses of "Obama", see Obama (disambiguation).
Barack Obama
President Barack Obama.jpg
44th President of the United States
Incumbent
Assumed office
January 20, 2009
Vice President	Joe Biden
Preceded by	George W. Bush
United States Senator
from Illinois
In office
January 3, 2005 C November 16, 2008
Preceded by	Peter Fitzgerald
Succeeded by	Roland Burris
Member of the Illinois Senate
from the 13th district
In office
January 8, 1997 C November 4, 2004
Preceded by	Alice Palmer
Succeeded by	Kwame Raoul
Personal details
Born	Barack Hussein Obama II
August 4, 1961 (age 54)
Honolulu, Hawaii, U.S.
Political party	Democratic
Spouse(s)	Michelle Robinson (m. 1992)
Children	Malia
Sasha
Residence	White House
Alma mater	Occidental College
Columbia University
Harvard University
Religion	Protestantism
Awards	Nobel Peace Prize (2009)
Signature	
Website	White House
Organizing for Action
Obama Foundation
President Barack Obama, 2012 portrait crop.jpg	This article is part of a series
about
Barack Obama
Political positions Electoral history
Early life and career Public image Family
Illinois Senate U.S. Senate
President of the United States
Incumbent

First term

Campaign for the Presidency 2008
Transition 1st inauguration Presidency
First 100 days Matthew Shepard Act Nobel Peace Prize War in Afghanistan Affordable Care Act Libyan Civil War Don't Ask, Don't Tell Iraq Withdrawal DACA Death of Osama bin Laden
Timeline: '09 '10 '11 '12
Policies [show]
Second term

Campaign 2012 Reactions
2nd inauguration Presidency
War on ISIL Immigration executive action Cuban Thaw War in Afghanistan
Iran Deal Paris Agreement Women in military combat Open transgender military service
Timeline: '13 '14 '15 '16
The Audacity of Hope Planned Library
Barack Obama signature.svg

President of the United States
v t e
Part of a series on
New Democrats
Barack Obama and Bill Clinton
Ideology[show]
Variants[show]
People[show]
Organizations[show]
icon Politics portal
v t e
Barack Hussein Obama II (US Listeni/b??r?k hu??se?n o??b?m?/;[1][2] born August 4, 1961) is the 44th and current President of the United States. He is the first African American to hold the office and the first president born outside of the continental United States. Born in Honolulu, Hawaii, Obama is a graduate of Columbia University and Harvard Law School, where he served as president of the Harvard Law Review. He was a community organizer in Chicago before earning his law degree. He worked as a civil rights attorney and taught constitutional law at the University of Chicago Law School between 1992 and 2004. While serving three terms representing the 13th District in the Illinois Senate from 1997 to 2004, he ran unsuccessfully in the Democratic primary for the United States House of Representatives in 2000 against incumbent Bobby Rush.

In 2004, Obama received national attention during his campaign to represent Illinois in the United States Senate with his victory in the March Democratic Party primary, his keynote address at the Democratic National Convention in July, and his election to the Senate in November. He began his presidential campaign in 2007 and, after a close primary campaign against Hillary Clinton in 2008, he won sufficient delegates in the Democratic Party primaries to receive the presidential nomination. He then defeated Republican nominee John McCain in the general election, and was inaugurated as president on January 20, 2009. Nine months after his inauguration, Obama was named the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize laureate.

During his first two years in office, Obama signed into law economic stimulus legislation in response to the Great Recession in the form of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 and the Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010. Other major domestic initiatives in his first term included the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, often referred to as "Obamacare"; the DoddCFrank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act; and the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010. In foreign policy, Obama ended U.S. military involvement in the Iraq War, increased U.S. troop levels in Afghanistan, signed the New START arms control treaty with Russia, ordered U.S. military involvement in Libya in opposition to Muammar Gaddafi, and ordered the military operation that resulted in the death of Osama bin Laden. In January 2011, the Republicans regained control of the House of Representatives as the Democratic Party lost a total of 63 seats; and, after a lengthy debate over federal spending and whether or not to raise the nation's debt limit, Obama signed the Budget Control Act of 2011 and the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012.

Obama was reelected president in November 2012, defeating Republican nominee Mitt Romney, and was sworn in for a second term on January 20, 2013. During his second term, Obama has promoted domestic policies related to gun control in response to the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, and has called for greater inclusiveness for LGBT Americans, while his administration has filed briefs which urged the Supreme Court to strike down part of the federal Defense of Marriage Act and state level same-sex marriage bans as unconstitutional. In foreign policy, Obama ordered U.S. military intervention in Iraq in response to gains made by ISIL after the 2011 withdrawal from Iraq, continued the process of ending U.S. combat operations in Afghanistan, promoted discussions that led to the 2015 Paris Agreement on global climate change, brokered a nuclear deal with Iran, and normalized U.S. relations with Cuba.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Early life and career
1.1	Community organizer and Harvard Law School
1.2	Chicago Law School and civil rights attorney
2	Legislative career
2.1	Illinois State Senator (from 1997)
2.2	2004 U.S. Senate campaign
2.3	U.S. Senator from Illinois (2005C08)
2.3.1	Legislation
2.3.2	Committees
3	Presidential campaigns
3.1	2008 presidential campaign
3.2	2012 presidential campaign
4	Presidency (since 2009)
4.1	First days
4.2	Domestic policy
4.2.1	LGBT rights
4.2.2	White House advisory and oversight groups
4.2.3	Economic policy
4.2.4	Environmental policy
4.2.5	Health care reform
4.2.6	Energy policy
4.2.7	Gun control
4.2.8	2010 midterm elections
4.2.9	Cybersecurity and Internet policy
4.3	Foreign policy
4.3.1	War in Iraq
4.3.2	War in Afghanistan
4.3.3	Israel
4.3.4	Libya
4.3.5	Syrian Civil War
4.3.6	Osama bin Laden
4.3.7	Iran nuclear talks
4.3.8	Relations with Cuba
4.3.9	Africa
4.3.10	Japan
5	Cultural and political image
6	Family and personal life
6.1	Religious views
7	Notes and references
7.1	Notes
7.2	References
7.3	Further reading
8	External links
Early life and career
Main articles: Family of Barack Obama and Early life and career of Barack Obama
Obama was born on August 4, 1961,[3] at Kapi?olani Maternity & Gynecological Hospital (now Kapi?olani Medical Center for Women and Children) in Honolulu, Hawaii;[4][5][6] he is the first President to have been born in Hawaii.[7] His mother, Stanley Ann Dunham, born in Wichita, Kansas, was of mostly English ancestry.[8] His father, Barack Obama Sr., was a Luo from Nyang'oma Kogelo, Kenya. Obama's parents met in 1960 in a Russian language class at the University of Hawaii at Manoa, where his father was a foreign student on scholarship.[9][10] The couple married in Wailuku on Maui on February 2, 1961,[11][12] and separated when, in late August 1961, Obama's mother moved with their newborn son to attend the University of Washington in Seattle for a year. During that time, Obama Sr. completed his undergraduate economics degree in Hawaii in June 1962, then left to attend graduate school at Harvard University on a scholarship. Obama's parents divorced in March 1964.[13] Obama Sr. returned to Kenya in 1964 where he remarried; he visited Barack in Hawaii only once, in 1971.[14] He died in an automobile accident in 1982, his son being 21 years old at that time.[15]

In 1963, Dunham met Lolo Soetoro, an Indonesian EastCWest Center graduate student in geography at the University of Hawaii, and the couple were married on Molokai on March 15, 1965.[16] After two one-year extensions of his J-1 visa, Lolo returned to Indonesia in 1966, followed sixteen months later by his wife and stepson in 1967, with the family initially living in a Menteng Dalam neighborhood in the Tebet subdistrict of south Jakarta, then from 1970 in a wealthier neighborhood in the Menteng subdistrict of central Jakarta.[17] From ages six to ten, Obama attended local Indonesian-language schools: Santo Fransiskus Asisi (St. Francis of Assisi) Catholic School for two years and Besuki Public School for one and a half years, supplemented by English-language Calvert School homeschooling by his mother.[18][19]

A young boy (preteen), a younger girl (toddler), a woman (about age thirty) and a man (in his mid-fifties) sit on a lawn wearing contemporary c.-1970 attire. The adults wear sunglasses and the boy wears sandals.
Obama with his half-sister Maya Soetoro-Ng, mother Ann Dunham and grandfather Stanley Dunham, in Honolulu, Hawaii
Obama returned to Honolulu in 1971 to live with his maternal grandparents, Madelyn and Stanley Dunham, and with the aid of a scholarship attended Punahou School, a private college preparatory school, from fifth grade until his graduation from high school in 1979.[20] In his youth, Obama went by the nickname Barry.[21] Obama lived with his mother and sister in Hawaii for three years from 1972 to 1975 while his mother was a graduate student in anthropology at the University of Hawaii.[22] Obama chose to stay in Hawaii with his grandparents for high school at Punahou when his mother and sister returned to Indonesia in 1975 so his mother could begin anthropology field work.[23] His mother spent most of the next two decades in Indonesia, divorcing Lolo in 1980 and earning a PhD degree in 1992, before dying in 1995 in Hawaii following treatment for ovarian cancer and uterine cancer.[24]

Of his early childhood, Obama recalled, "That my father looked nothing like the people around me C that he was black as pitch, my mother white as milk C barely registered in my mind."[10] He described his struggles as a young adult to reconcile social perceptions of his multiracial heritage.[25] Reflecting later on his years in Honolulu, Obama wrote: "The opportunity that Hawaii offered C to experience a variety of cultures in a climate of mutual respect C became an integral part of my world view, and a basis for the values that I hold most dear."[26] Obama has also written and talked about using alcohol, marijuana, and cocaine during his teenage years to "push questions of who I was out of my mind".[27] Obama was also a member of the "choom gang", a self-named group of friends that spent time together and occasionally smoked marijuana.[28][29]

After high school, Obama moved to Los Angeles in 1979 to attend Occidental College. In February 1981, Obama made his first public speech, calling for Occidental to participate in the disinvestment from South Africa in response to that nation's policy of apartheid.[30] In mid-1981, Obama traveled to Indonesia to visit his mother and half-sister Maya, and visited the families of college friends in Pakistan and India for three weeks.[30] Later in 1981, he transferred as a junior to Columbia College, Columbia University, in New York City, where he majored in political science with a specialty in international relations[31] and lived off-campus on West 109th Street.[32] He graduated with a BA degree in 1983 and worked for a year at the Business International Corporation,[33] then at the New York Public Interest Research Group.[34][35] In 1985, Obama was among the leaders of May Day efforts to bring attention to the New York City Subway system, which was in a bad condition at the time. Obama traveled to several subway stations to get people to sign letters addressed to local officials and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, and was photographed at the City College subway station holding a sign protesting against the system's condition.[36]

Community organizer and Harvard Law School
Two years after graduating, Obama was hired in Chicago as director of the Developing Communities Project, a church-based community organization originally comprising eight Catholic parishes in Roseland, West Pullman, and Riverdale on Chicago's South Side. He worked there as a community organizer from June 1985 to May 1988.[35][37] He helped set up a job training program, a college preparatory tutoring program, and a tenants' rights organization in Altgeld Gardens.[38] Obama also worked as a consultant and instructor for the Gamaliel Foundation, a community organizing institute.[39] In mid-1988, he traveled for the first time in Europe for three weeks and then for five weeks in Kenya, where he met many of his paternal relatives for the first time.[40][41]

Obama entered Harvard Law School in the fall of 1988, living in nearby Somerville, Massachusetts.[42] He was selected as an editor of the Harvard Law Review at the end of his first year,[43] president of the journal in his second year,[38][44] and research assistant to the constitutional scholar Laurence Tribe while at Harvard for two years.[45] During his summers, he returned to Chicago, where he worked as an associate at the law firms of Sidley Austin in 1989 and Hopkins & Sutter in 1990.[46] After graduating with a JD degree magna cum laude[47] from Harvard in 1991, he returned to Chicago.[43] Obama's election as the first black president of the Harvard Law Review gained national media attention[38][44] and led to a publishing contract and advance for a book about race relations,[48] which evolved into a personal memoir. The manuscript was published in mid-1995 as Dreams from My Father.[48]

Chicago Law School and civil rights attorney
In 1991, Obama accepted a two-year position as Visiting Law and Government Fellow at the University of Chicago Law School to work on his first book.[48][49] He then taught constitutional law at the University of Chicago Law School for twelve years, first as a Lecturer from 1992 to 1996, and then as a Senior Lecturer from 1996 to 2004.[50]

From April to October 1992, Obama directed Illinois's Project Vote, a voter registration campaign with ten staffers and seven hundred volunteer registrars; it achieved its goal of registering 150,000 of 400,000 unregistered African Americans in the state, leading Crain's Chicago Business to name Obama to its 1993 list of "40 under Forty" powers to be.[51]

He joined Davis, Miner, Barnhill & Galland, a 13-attorney law firm specializing in civil rights litigation and neighborhood economic development, where he was an associate for three years from 1993 to 1996, then of counsel from 1996 to 2004. In 1994, he was listed as one of the lawyers in Buycks-Roberson v. Citibank Fed. Sav. Bank, 94 C 4094 (N.D. Ill.).[52] This class action lawsuit was filed in 1994 with Selma Buycks-Roberson as lead plaintiff and alleged that Citibank Federal Savings Bank had engaged in practices forbidden under the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the Fair Housing Act.[53] The case was settled out of court.[54] Final Judgment was issued on May 13, 1998 with Citibank Federal Savings Bank agreeing to pay attorney fees.[55] His law license became inactive in 2007.[56][57]

From 1994 to 2002, Obama served on the boards of directors of the Woods Fund of Chicago, which in 1985 had been the first foundation to fund the Developing Communities Project, and of the Joyce Foundation.[35] He served on the board of directors of the Chicago Annenberg Challenge from 1995 to 2002, as founding president and chairman of the board of directors from 1995 to 1999.[35]

Legislative career
Illinois State Senator (from 1997)
Main article: Illinois Senate career of Barack Obama

Obama and others celebrate the naming of a street in Chicago after ShoreBank co-founder Milton Davis in 1998
Obama was elected to the Illinois Senate in 1996, succeeding Democratic State Senator Alice Palmer as Senator from Illinois's 13th District, which at that time spanned Chicago South Side neighborhoods from Hyde ParkCKenwood south to South Shore and west to Chicago Lawn.[58] Once elected, Obama gained bipartisan support for legislation that reformed ethics and health care laws.[59] He sponsored a law that increased tax credits for low-income workers, negotiated welfare reform, and promoted increased subsidies for childcare.[60] In 2001, as co-chairman of the bipartisan Joint Committee on Administrative Rules, Obama supported Republican Governor Ryan's payday loan regulations and predatory mortgage lending regulations aimed at averting home foreclosures.[61]

He was reelected to the Illinois Senate in 1998, defeating Republican Yesse Yehudah in the general election, and was reelected again in 2002.[62] In 2000, he lost a Democratic primary race for Illinois's 1st congressional district in the United States House of Representatives to four-term incumbent Bobby Rush by a margin of two to one.[63]

In January 2003, Obama became chairman of the Illinois Senate's Health and Human Services Committee when Democrats, after a decade in the minority, regained a majority.[64] He sponsored and led unanimous, bipartisan passage of legislation to monitor racial profiling by requiring police to record the race of drivers they detained, and legislation making Illinois the first state to mandate videotaping of homicide interrogations.[60][65] During his 2004 general election campaign for U.S. Senate, police representatives credited Obama for his active engagement with police organizations in enacting death penalty reforms.[66] Obama resigned from the Illinois Senate in November 2004 following his election to the U.S. Senate.[67]

2004 U.S. Senate campaign
Main article: United States Senate election in Illinois, 2004

County results of the 2004 U.S. Senate race in Illinois. Obama won the counties in blue.
In May 2002, Obama commissioned a poll to assess his prospects in a 2004 U.S. Senate race. He created a campaign committee, began raising funds, and lined up political media consultant David Axelrod by August 2002. Obama formally announced his candidacy in January 2003.[68]

Obama was an early opponent of the George W. Bush administration's 2003 invasion of Iraq.[69] On October 2, 2002, the day President Bush and Congress agreed on the joint resolution authorizing the Iraq War,[70] Obama addressed the first high-profile Chicago anti-Iraq War rally,[71] and spoke out against the war.[72] He addressed another anti-war rally in March 2003 and told the crowd that "it's not too late" to stop the war.[73]

Decisions by Republican incumbent Peter Fitzgerald and his Democratic predecessor Carol Moseley Braun to not participate in the election resulted in wide-open Democratic and Republican primary contests involving fifteen candidates.[74] In the March 2004 primary election, Obama won in an unexpected landslidewhich overnight made him a rising star within the national Democratic Party, started speculation about a presidential future, and led to the reissue of his memoir, Dreams from My Father.[75] In July 2004, Obama delivered the keynote address at the 2004 Democratic National Convention,[76] seen by 9.1 million viewers. His speech was well received and elevated his status within the Democratic Party.[77]

Obama's expected opponent in the general election, Republican primary winner Jack Ryan, withdrew from the race in June 2004.[78] Six weeks later, Alan Keyes accepted the Republican nomination to replace Ryan.[79] In the November 2004 general election, Obama won with 70 percent of the vote.[80]

U.S. Senator from Illinois (2005C08)
Main article: United States Senate career of Barack Obama

Obama in his official portrait as a member of the United States Senate
Obama was sworn in as a senator on January 3, 2005,[81] becoming the only Senate member of the Congressional Black Caucus.[82] CQ Weekly characterized him as a "loyal Democrat" based on analysis of all Senate votes from 2005 to 2007. Obama announced on November 13, 2008, that he would resign his Senate seat on November 16, 2008, before the start of the lame-duck session, to focus on his transition period for the presidency.[83]

Legislation
See also: List of bills sponsored by Barack Obama in the United States Senate
Obama cosponsored the Secure America and Orderly Immigration Act.[84] He introduced two initiatives that bore his name: LugarCObama, which expanded the NunnCLugar Cooperative Threat Reduction concept to conventional weapons;[85] and the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006, which authorized the establishment of USAspending.gov, a web search engine on federal spending.[86] On June 3, 2008, Senator Obamaalong with Senators Tom Carper, Tom Coburn, and John McCainintroduced follow-up legislation: Strengthening Transparency and Accountability in Federal Spending Act of 2008.[87]

Obama sponsored legislation that would have required nuclear plant owners to notify state and local authorities of radioactive leaks, but the bill failed to pass in the full Senate after being heavily modified in committee.[88] Regarding tort reform, Obama voted for the Class Action Fairness Act of 2005 and the FISA Amendments Act of 2008, which grants immunity from civil liability to telecommunications companies complicit with NSA warrantless wiretapping operations.[89]

Gray-haired man and Obama stand, wearing casual polo shirts. Obama wears sunglasses and holds something slung over his right shoulder.
Obama and U.S. Sen. Richard Lugar (R-IN) visit a Russian facility for dismantling mobile missiles (August 2005)[90]
In December 2006, President Bush signed into law the Democratic Republic of the Congo Relief, Security, and Democracy Promotion Act, marking the first federal legislation to be enacted with Obama as its primary sponsor.[91] In January 2007, Obama and Senator Feingold introduced a corporate jet provision to the Honest Leadership and Open Government Act, which was signed into law in September 2007.[92] Obama also introduced two unsuccessful bills: the Deceptive Practices and Voter Intimidation Prevention Act to criminalize deceptive practices in federal elections,[93] and the Iraq War De-Escalation Act of 2007.[94]

Later in 2007, Obama sponsored an amendment to the Defense Authorization Act to add safeguards for personality-disorder military discharges.[95] This amendment passed the full Senate in the spring of 2008.[96] He sponsored the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act supporting divestment of state pension funds from Iran's oil and gas industry, which has not passed committee; and co-sponsored legislation to reduce risks of nuclear terrorism.[97] Obama also sponsored a Senate amendment to the State Children's Health Insurance Program, providing one year of job protection for family members caring for soldiers with combat-related injuries.[98]

Committees
Obama held assignments on the Senate Committees for Foreign Relations, Environment and Public Works and Veterans' Affairs through December 2006.[99] In January 2007, he left the Environment and Public Works committee and took additional assignments with Health, Education, Labor and Pensions and Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.[100] He also became Chairman of the Senate's subcommittee on European Affairs.[101] As a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Obama made official trips to Eastern Europe, the Middle East, Central Asia and Africa. He met with Mahmoud Abbas before Abbas became President of the Palestinian National Authority, and gave a speech at the University of Nairobi in which he condemned corruption within the Kenyan government.[102]

Presidential campaigns
2008 presidential campaign
Main articles: United States presidential election, 2008; Barack Obama presidential primary campaign, 2008; and Barack Obama presidential campaign, 2008
Photograph
Obama stands on stage with his wife and daughters just before announcing his presidential candidacy in Springfield, Illinois, February 10, 2007
On February 10, 2007, Obama announced his candidacy for President of the United States in front of the Old State Capitol building in Springfield, Illinois.[103][104] The choice of the announcement site was viewed as symbolic because it was also where Abraham Lincoln delivered his historic "House Divided" speech in 1858.[103][105] Obama emphasized issues of rapidly ending the Iraq War, increasing energy independence, and reforming the health care system,[106] in a campaign that projected themes of hope and change.[107]

Numerous candidates entered the Democratic Party presidential primaries. The field narrowed to a duel between Obama and Senator Hillary Clinton after early contests, with the race remaining close throughout the primary process but with Obama gaining a steady lead in pledged delegates due to better long-range planning, superior fundraising, dominant organizing in caucus states, and better exploitation of delegate allocation rules.[108] On June 7, 2008, Clinton ended her campaign and endorsed Obama.[109]

Photograph
President George W. Bush meets with President-elect Obama in the Oval Office on November 10, 2008
On August 23, Obama announced his selection of Delaware Senator Joe Biden as his vice presidential running mate.[110] Obama selected Biden from a field speculated to include former Indiana Governor and Senator Evan Bayh and Virginia Governor Tim Kaine.[111] At the Democratic National Convention in Denver, Colorado, Hillary Clinton called for her supporters to endorse Obama, and she and Bill Clinton gave convention speeches in his support.[112] Obama delivered his acceptance speech, not at the center where the Democratic National Convention was held, but at Invesco Field at Mile High to a crowd of over 75,000; the speech was viewed by over 38 million people worldwide.[113][114]

During both the primary process and the general election, Obama's campaign set numerous fundraising records, particularly in the quantity of small donations.[115] On June 19, 2008, Obama became the first major-party presidential candidate to turn down public financing in the general election since the system was created in 1976.[116]

John McCain was nominated as the Republican candidate, and the two engaged in three presidential debates in September and October 2008.[117] On November 4, Obama won the presidency with 365 electoral votes to 173 received by McCain.[118] Obama won 52.9 percent of the popular vote to McCain's 45.7 percent.[119] He became the first African American to be elected president.[120] Obama delivered his victory speech before hundreds of thousands of supporters in Chicago's Grant Park.[121]

2012 presidential campaign
Main articles: United States presidential election, 2012 and Barack Obama presidential campaign, 2012

Former Governor Mitt Romney and President Barack Obama shake hands in the Oval Office on November 29, 2012, following their first meeting since President Obama's re-election
On April 4, 2011, Obama announced his reelection campaign for 2012 in a video titled "It Begins with Us" that he posted on his website and filed election papers with the Federal Election Commission.[122][123][124] As the incumbent president he ran virtually unopposed in the Democratic Party presidential primaries,[125] and on April 3, 2012, Obama had secured the 2778 convention delegates needed to win the Democratic nomination.[126]

At the Democratic National Convention in Charlotte, North Carolina, Obama and Joe Biden were formally nominated by former President Bill Clinton, as the Democratic Party candidates for president and vice president in the general election. Their main opponents were Republicans Mitt Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts, and Representative Paul Ryan of Wisconsin.[127]

On November 6, 2012, Obama won 332 electoral votes, exceeding the 270 required for him to be reelected as president.[128][129][130] With 51.1 percent of the popular vote,[131] Obama became the first Democratic president since Franklin D. Roosevelt to twice win the majority of the popular vote.[132][133] President Obama addressed supporters and volunteers at Chicago's McCormick Place after his reelection and said: "Tonight you voted for action, not politics as usual. You elected us to focus on your jobs, not ours. And in the coming weeks and months, I am looking forward to reaching out and working with leaders of both parties."[134][135]

Presidency (since 2009)
Main article: Presidency of Barack Obama
See also: Confirmations of Barack Obama's Cabinet and List of international presidential trips made by Barack Obama
First days
Photograph
Barack Obama takes the oath of office administered by Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. at the Capitol, January 20, 2009
The inauguration of Barack Obama as the 44th President took place on January 20, 2009. In his first few days in office, Obama issued executive orders and presidential memoranda directing the U.S. military to develop plans to withdraw troops from Iraq.[136] He ordered the closing of the Guantanamo Bay detention camp,[137] but Congress prevented the closure by refusing to appropriate the required funds[138][139][140] and preventing moving any Guantanamo detainee into the U.S. or to other countries.[141] Obama reduced the secrecy given to presidential records.[142] He also revoked President George W. Bush's restoration of President Ronald Reagan's Mexico City Policy prohibiting federal aid to international family planning organizations that perform or provide counseling about abortion.[143]

Domestic policy
Main article: Social policy of Barack Obama
The first bill signed into law by Obama was the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009, relaxing the statute of limitations for equal-pay lawsuits.[144] Five days later, he signed the reauthorization of the State Children's Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) to cover an additional 4 million uninsured children.[145] In March 2009, Obama reversed a Bush-era policy which had limited funding of embryonic stem cell research and pledged to develop "strict guidelines" on the research.[146]


Obama delivering a speech at joint session of Congress with Vice President Joe Biden and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi on February 24, 2009
Obama appointed two women to serve on the Supreme Court in the first two years of his Presidency. Sonia Sotomayor, nominated by Obama on May 26, 2009, to replace retiring Associate Justice David Souter, was confirmed on August 6, 2009,[147] becoming the first Hispanic Supreme Court Justice.[148] Elena Kagan, nominated by Obama on May 10, 2010, to replace retiring Associate Justice John Paul Stevens, was confirmed on August 5, 2010, bringing the number of women sitting simultaneously on the Court to three, for the first time in American history.[149]

On March 30, 2010, Obama signed the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act, a reconciliation bill which ends the process of the federal government giving subsidies to private banks to give out federally insured loans, increases the Pell Grant scholarship award, and makes changes to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.[150][151]

In a major space policy speech in April 2010, Obama announced a planned change in direction at NASA, the U.S. space agency. He ended plans for a return of human spaceflight to the moon and development of the Ares I rocket, Ares V rocket and Constellation program, in favor of funding Earth science projects, a new rocket type, and research and development for an eventual manned mission to Mars, and ongoing missions to the International Space Station.[152]


Obama meets with the Cabinet, November 23, 2009
President Obama's 2011 State of the Union Address focused on themes of education and innovation, stressing the importance of innovation economics to make the United States more competitive globally. He spoke of a five-year freeze in domestic spending, eliminating tax breaks for oil companies and reversing tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans, banning congressional earmarks, and reducing healthcare costs. He promised that the United States would have one million electric vehicles on the road by 2015 and would be 80 percent reliant on "clean" electricity.[153][154]

LGBT rights
On October 8, 2009, Obama signed the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act, a measure that expands the 1969 United States federal hate-crime law to include crimes motivated by a victim's actual or perceived gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability.[155][156]

On December 22, 2010, Obama signed the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010, fulfilling a key promise made in the 2008 presidential campaign[157][158] to end the Don't ask, don't tell policy of 1993 that had prevented gay and lesbian people from serving openly in the United States Armed Forces.[159]


The White House was illuminated in rainbow colors on the evening of the Supreme Court same-sex marriage ruling
In 1996, as a candidate for the Illinois state senate, Obama had said that he favored legalizing same-sex marriage;[160] but by the time of his Senate run in 2004, he said that while he supported civil unions and domestic partnerships for same-sex partners, for strategic reasons he opposed same-sex marriages.[161] On May 9, 2012, shortly after the official launch of his campaign for reelection as president, Obama said his views had evolved, and he publicly affirmed his personal support for the legalization of same-sex marriage, becoming the first sitting U.S. president to do so.[162][163]

During his second inaugural address on January 21, 2013,[135] Obama became the first president to call for full equality for gay Americans: "Our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law C for if we are truly created equal, then surely the love we commit to one another must be equal as well." This was the first time that a president mentioned gay rights or the word "gay" in an inaugural address.[164][165] In 2013, the Obama administration filed briefs urging the Supreme Court to rule in favor of same-sex couples in the cases of Hollingsworth v. Perry (regarding same-sex marriage)[166] and United States v. Windsor (regarding the Defense of Marriage Act).[167] Then, following the Supreme Court's 2015 decision in Obergefell v. Hodges (ruling same-sex marriage to be a fundamental right), Obama asserted that, "This decision affirms what millions of Americans already believe in their hearts: When all Americans are treated as equal we are all more free."[168]

White House advisory and oversight groups
On March 11, 2009, Obama created the White House Council on Women and Girls, which forms part of the Office of Intergovernmental Affairs, having been established by Executive Order 13506 with a broad mandate to advise him on issues relating to the welfare of American women and girls.[169] The Council is currently chaired by Senior Advisor to the President Valerie Jarrett.[170] Obama also established the White House Task Force to Protect Students from Sexual Assault through an official United States government memorandum on January 22, 2014 with a broad mandate to advise him on issues relating to sexual assault on college and university campuses throughout the United States.[170][171][172] The current co-chairs of the Task Force are Vice President Joe Biden and Jarrett.[171] The Task Force has been a development out of the White House Council on Women and Girls and Office of the Vice President of the United States, and prior to that, the 1994 Violence Against Women Act that was first-drafted by Biden.[173]

Economic policy
Main article: Economic policy of Barack Obama
File:20090124 WeeklyAddress.ogv
Obama presents his first weekly address as President of the United States on January 24, 2009, discussing the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
On February 17, 2009, Obama signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, a $787 billion economic stimulus package aimed at helping the economy recover from the deepening worldwide recession.[174] The act includes increased federal spending for health care, infrastructure, education, various tax breaks and incentives, and direct assistance to individuals.[175]

In March, Obama's Treasury Secretary, Timothy Geithner, took further steps to manage the financial crisis, including introducing the Public-Private Investment Program for Legacy Assets, which contains provisions for buying up to two trillion dollars in depreciated real estate assets.[176] Obama intervened in the troubled automotive industry[177] in March 2009, renewing loans for General Motors and Chrysler to continue operations while reorganizing. Over the following months the White House set terms for both firms' bankruptcies, including the sale of Chrysler to Italian automaker Fiat[178] and a reorganization of GM giving the U.S. government a temporary 60 percent equity stake in the company, with the Canadian government taking a 12 percent stake.[179] In June 2009, dissatisfied with the pace of economic stimulus, Obama called on his cabinet to accelerate the investment.[180] He signed into law the Car Allowance Rebate System, known colloquially as "Cash for Clunkers", that temporarily boosted the economy.[181][182][183]


Deficit and Debt increases 2001C15
Spending and loan guarantees from the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department authorized by the Bush and Obama administrations totaled about $11.5 trillion, but only $3 trillion was spent by the end of November 2009.[184] Obama and the Congressional Budget Office predicted the 2010 budget deficit would be $1.5 trillion or 10.6 percent of the nation's gross domestic product (GDP) compared to the 2009 deficit of $1.4 trillion or 9.9 percent of GDP.[185][186] For 2011, the administration predicted the deficit will shrink to $1.34 trillion, and the 10-year deficit will increase to $8.53 trillion or 90 percent of GDP.[187] The most recent increase in the U.S. debt ceiling to $17.2 trillion took effect in February 2014.[188] On August 2, 2011, after a lengthy congressional debate over whether to raise the nation's debt limit, Obama signed the bipartisan Budget Control Act of 2011. The legislation enforces limits on discretionary spending until 2021, establishes a procedure to increase the debt limit, creates a Congressional Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction to propose further deficit reduction with a stated goal of achieving at least $1.5 trillion in budgetary savings over 10 years, and establishes automatic procedures for reducing spending by as much as $1.2 trillion if legislation originating with the new joint select committee does not achieve such savings.[189] By passing the legislation, Congress was able to prevent a U.S. government default on its obligations.[190]


Employment statistics (changes in unemployment rate and net jobs per month) during Obama's tenure as U.S. President[191][192]
As it did throughout 2008, the unemployment rate rose in 2009, reaching a peak in October at 10.0 percent and averaging 10.0 percent in the fourth quarter. Following a decrease to 9.7 percent in the first quarter of 2010, the unemployment rate fell to 9.6 percent in the second quarter, where it remained for the rest of the year.[193] Between February and December 2010, employment rose by 0.8 percent, which was less than the average of 1.9 percent experienced during comparable periods in the past four employment recoveries.[194] By November 2012, the unemployment rate fell to 7.7 percent,[195] decreasing to 6.7 percent in the last month of 2013.[196] During 2014, the unemployment rate continued to decline, falling to 6.3 percent in the first quarter.[197] GDP growth returned in the third quarter of 2009, expanding at a rate of 1.6 percent, followed by a 5.0 percent increase in the fourth quarter.[198] Growth continued in 2010, posting an increase of 3.7 percent in the first quarter, with lesser gains throughout the rest of the year.[198] In July 2010, the Federal Reserve noted that economic activity continued to increase, but its pace had slowed, and chairman Ben Bernanke said the economic outlook was "unusually uncertain".[199] Overall, the economy expanded at a rate of 2.9 percent in 2010.[200]

The Congressional Budget Office and a broad range of economists credit Obama's stimulus plan for economic growth.[201][202] The CBO released a report stating that the stimulus bill increased employment by 1C2.1 million,[202][203][204][205] while conceding that "It is impossible to determine how many of the reported jobs would have existed in the absence of the stimulus package."[201] Although an April 2010 survey of members of the National Association for Business Economics showed an increase in job creation (over a similar January survey) for the first time in two years, 73 percent of 68 respondents believed that the stimulus bill has had no impact on employment.[206] The economy of the United States has grown faster than the other original NATO members by a wider margin under President Obama than it has anytime since the end of World War II.[207] The OECD credits the much faster growth in the United States to the stimulus in the United States and the austerity measures in the European Union.[208]

Within a month of the 2010 midterm elections, Obama announced a compromise deal with the Congressional Republican leadership that included a temporary, two-year extension of the 2001 and 2003 income tax rates, a one-year payroll tax reduction, continuation of unemployment benefits, and a new rate and exemption amount for estate taxes.[209] The compromise overcame opposition from some in both parties, and the resulting $858 billion Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010 passed with bipartisan majorities in both houses of Congress before Obama signed it on December 17, 2010.[210]

In December 2013, Obama declared that growing income inequality is a "defining challenge of our time" and called on Congress to bolster the safety net and raise wages. This came on the heels of the nationwide strikes of fast-food workers and Pope Francis' criticism of inequality and trickle-down economics.[211]

Environmental policy
See also: Climate change policy of the United States

Obama at a 2010 briefing on the BP oil spill at the Coast Guard Station Venice in Venice, Louisiana
On September 30, 2009, the Obama administration proposed new regulations on power plants, factories, and oil refineries in an attempt to limit greenhouse gas emissions and to curb global warming.[212][213]

On April 20, 2010, an explosion destroyed an offshore drilling rig at the Macondo Prospect in the Gulf of Mexico, causing a major sustained oil leak. Obama visited the Gulf, announced a federal investigation, and formed a bipartisan commission to recommend new safety standards, after a review by Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar and concurrent Congressional hearings. He then announced a six-month moratorium on new deepwater drilling permits and leases, pending regulatory review.[214] As multiple efforts by BP failed, some in the media and public expressed confusion and criticism over various aspects of the incident, and stated a desire for more involvement by Obama and the federal government.[215]

In July 2013, Obama expressed reservations and stated he "would reject the Keystone XL pipeline if it increased carbon pollution" or "greenhouse emissions".[216][217] Obama's advisers called for a halt to petroleum exploration in the Arctic in January 2013.[218] On February 24, 2015, Obama vetoed a bill that would authorize the pipeline.[219] It was the third veto of Obama's presidency and his first major veto.[220]

Health care reform
Main article: Health care reform in the United States
Photograph
Obama signs the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act at the White House, March 23, 2010
Obama called for Congress to pass legislation reforming health care in the United States, a key campaign promise and a top legislative goal.[221] He proposed an expansion of health insurance coverage to cover the uninsured, to cap premium increases, and to allow people to retain their coverage when they leave or change jobs. His proposal was to spend $900 billion over 10 years and include a government insurance plan, also known as the public option, to compete with the corporate insurance sector as a main component to lowering costs and improving quality of health care. It would also make it illegal for insurers to drop sick people or deny them coverage for pre-existing conditions, and require every American to carry health coverage. The plan also includes medical spending cuts and taxes on insurance companies that offer expensive plans.[222][223]

On July 14, 2009, House Democratic leaders introduced a 1,017-page plan for overhauling the U.S. health care system, which Obama wanted Congress to approve by the end of 2009.[221] After much public debate during the Congressional summer recess of 2009, Obama delivered a speech to a joint session of Congress on September 9 where he addressed concerns over the proposals.[224] In March 2009, Obama lifted a ban on using federal funds for stem cell research.[225]


Maximum Out-of-Pocket Premium as Percentage of Family Income and federal poverty level, under Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, starting in 2014 (Source: CRS)[226]
On November 7, 2009, a health care bill featuring the public option was passed in the House.[227][228] On December 24, 2009, the Senate passed its own billwithout a public optionon a party-line vote of 60C39.[229] On March 21, 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) passed by the Senate in December was passed in the House by a vote of 219 to 212.[230] Obama signed the bill into law on March 23, 2010.[231]

The ACA includes health-related provisions to take effect over four years, including expanding Medicaid eligibility for people making up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL) starting in 2014,[232] subsidizing insurance premiums for people making up to 400 percent of the FPL ($88,000 for family of four in 2010) so their maximum "out-of-pocket" payment for annual premiums will be from 2 to 9.5 percent of income,[233][234] providing incentives for businesses to provide health care benefits, prohibiting denial of coverage and denial of claims based on pre-existing conditions, establishing health insurance exchanges, prohibiting annual coverage caps, and support for medical research. According to White House and Congressional Budget Office figures, the maximum share of income that enrollees would have to pay would vary depending on their income relative to the federal poverty level.[233][235]

The costs of these provisions are offset by taxes, fees, and cost-saving measures, such as new Medicare taxes for those in high-income brackets, taxes on indoor tanning, cuts to the Medicare Advantage program in favor of traditional Medicare, and fees on medical devices and pharmaceutical companies;[236] there is also a tax penalty for those who do not obtain health insurance, unless they are exempt due to low income or other reasons.[237] In March 2010, the Congressional Budget Office estimated that the net effect of both laws will be a reduction in the federal deficit by $143 billion over the first decade.[238]

The law faced several legal challenges, primarily based on the argument that an individual mandate requiring Americans to buy health insurance was unconstitutional. On June 28, 2012, the Supreme Court ruled by a 5C4 vote in National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius that the mandate was constitutional under the U.S. Congress's taxing authority.[239] In Burwell v. Hobby Lobby the Court ruled that "closely-held" for-profit corporations could be exempt on religious grounds under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act from regulations adopted under the ACA that would have required them to pay for insurance that covered certain contraceptives. In June 2015, the Court ruled 6C3 in King v. Burwell that subsidies to help individuals and families purchase health insurance were authorized for those doing so on both the federal exchange and state exchanges, not only those purchasing plans "established by the State," as the statute reads.[240]

Energy policy
Main article: Energy policy of the Obama administration
Prior to June 2014, Obama offered substantial support for a broadly based "All of the above" approach to domestic energy policy which Obama has maintained since his first term and which he last confirmed at his State of the Union speech in January 2014 to a mixed reception by both parties. In June 2014, Obama made indications that his administration would consider a shift towards an energy policy more closely tuned to the manufacturing industry and its impact on the domestic economy.[241] Obama's approach of selectively combining regulation and incentive to various issues in the domestic energy policy such as coal mining and oil fracking has received mixed commentary for not being as responsive to the needs of the domestic manufacturing sector as needed, following claims that the domestic manufacturing sector utilizes as much as a third of nation's available energy resources.[242][243]

Gun control

President Obama at University of Colorado Hospital visiting 2012 Aurora shooting victims
On January 16, 2013, one month after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, President Obama signed 23 executive orders and outlined a series of sweeping proposals regarding gun control.[244] He urged Congress to reintroduce an expired ban on military-style assault weapons, such as those used in several recent mass shootings, impose limits on ammunition magazines to 10 rounds, introduce background checks on all gun sales, pass a ban on possession and sale of armor-piercing bullets, introduce harsher penalties for gun-traffickers, especially unlicensed dealers who buy arms for criminals and approving the appointment of the head of the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives for the first time since 2006.[245] On January 5, 2016, Obama announced new executive actions extending background check requirements to more gun sellers.[246] In a 2016 editorial in the New York Times, Obama compared the struggle for what he termed "common-sense gun reform" to women's suffrage and other civil rights movements in American history.[247]

2010 midterm elections
Main articles: United States House of Representatives elections, 2010 and United States Senate elections, 2010
Obama called the November 2, 2010 election, where the Democratic Party lost 63 seats in, and control of, the House of Representatives,[248] "humbling" and a "shellacking".[249] He said that the results came because not enough Americans had felt the effects of the economic recovery.[250]

Cybersecurity and Internet policy
On November 10, 2014, President Obama recommended the Federal Communications Commission reclassify broadband Internet service as a telecommunications service in order to preserve net neutrality.[251][252] On February 12, 2013, President Obama signed Executive Order 13636, "Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity".[253]

Foreign policy
Main article: Foreign policy of Barack Obama
President Obama stands at a podium delivering a speech on "A New Beginning" at Cairo University on June 4, 2009
Obama speaking on "A New Beginning" at Cairo University on June 4, 2009

International trips made by President Barack Obama during his terms in office
In February and March 2009, Vice President Joe Biden and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton made separate overseas trips to announce a "new era" in U.S. foreign relations with Russia and Europe, using the terms "break" and "reset" to signal major changes from the policies of the preceding administration.[254] Obama attempted to reach out to Arab leaders by granting his first interview to an Arab cable TV network, Al Arabiya.[255]

On March 19, Obama continued his outreach to the Muslim world, releasing a New Year's video message to the people and government of Iran.[256][257] In April, Obama gave a speech in Ankara, Turkey, which was well received by many Arab governments.[258] On June 4, 2009, Obama delivered a speech at Cairo University in Egypt calling for "A New Beginning" in relations between the Islamic world and the United States and promoting Middle East peace.[259]

On June 26, 2009, in response to the Iranian government's actions towards protesters following Iran's 2009 presidential election, Obama said: "The violence perpetrated against them is outrageous. We see it and we condemn it."[260] On July 7, while in Moscow, he responded to a Vice President Biden comment on a possible Israeli military strike on Iran by saying: "We have said directly to the Israelis that it is important to try and resolve this in an international setting in a way that does not create major conflict in the Middle East."[261]

On September 24, 2009, Obama became the first sitting U.S. president to preside over a meeting of the United Nations Security Council.[262]

In March 2010, Obama took a public stance against plans by the government of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to continue building Jewish housing projects in predominantly Arab neighborhoods of East Jerusalem.[263][264] During the same month, an agreement was reached with the administration of Russian President Dmitry Medvedev to replace the 1991 Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty with a new pact reducing the number of long-range nuclear weapons in the arsenals of both countries by about one-third.[265] Obama and Medvedev signed the New START treaty in April 2010, and the U.S. Senate ratified it in December 2010.[266]

In December 2011, Obama instructed agencies to consider LGBT rights when issuing financial aid to foreign countries.[267] He criticized Russia's law discriminating against gays in August 2013,[268] stopping short of advocating a boycott of the 2014 Winter Olympics held in Sochi, Russia.[269]

In December 2014, Obama announced that he intended to normalize relationships between Cuba and the United States.[270] The countries' respective "interests sections" in one another's capitals were upgraded to embassies on July 20, 2015.

In March 2015, Obama declared that he had authorized U.S. forces to provide logistical and intelligence support to the Saudis in their military intervention in Yemen, establishing a "Joint Planning Cell" with Saudi Arabia.[271]

War in Iraq
Main articles: Iraq War and American-led intervention in Iraq (2014Cpresent)
On February 27, 2009, Obama announced that combat operations in Iraq would end within 18 months. His remarks were made to a group of Marines preparing for deployment to Afghanistan. Obama said, "Let me say this as plainly as I can: by August 31, 2010, our combat mission in Iraq will end."[272] The Obama administration scheduled the withdrawal of combat troops to be completed by August 2010, decreasing troop's levels from 142,000 while leaving a transitional force of about 50,000 in Iraq until the end of 2011. On August 19, 2010, the last U.S. combat brigade exited Iraq. Remaining troops transitioned from combat operations to counter-terrorism and the training, equipping, and advising of Iraqi security forces.[273][274] On August 31, 2010, Obama announced that the United States combat mission in Iraq was over.[275] On October 21, 2011 President Obama announced that all U.S. troops would leave Iraq in time to be "home for the holidays".[276]

US President Barack Obama and British Prime Minister David Cameron trade bottles of beer to settle a bet they made on the U.S. vs. England World Cup Soccer game (which ended in a tie), during a bilateral meeting at the G20 Summit in Toronto, Canada, Saturday, June 26, 2010
Meeting with UK Prime Minister David Cameron during the 2010 G20 Toronto summit
In June 2014, following the capture of Mosul by Daesh, Obama sent 275 troops to provide support and security for U.S. personnel and the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad. Daesh continued to gain ground and to commit widespread massacres and ethnic cleansing.[277][278]

In August 2014, during the Sinjar massacre, Obama ordered a campaign of U.S. airstrikes against Daesh.[279]

By the end of 2014, 3,100 American ground troops were committed to the conflict[280] and 16,000 sorties were flown over the battlefield, primarily by U.S. Air Force and Navy pilots.[281]

In the Spring of 2015, with the addition of the "Panther Brigade" of the 82nd Airborne Division the number of U.S. ground troops in Iraq surged to 4,400,[282] and by July American-led coalition air forces counted 44,000 sorties over the battlefield.[283]


President Obama meets with Argentine President Mauricio Macri in Buenos Aires, March 23, 2016
War in Afghanistan
Main article: War in Afghanistan (2001C14)
Early in his presidency, Obama moved to bolster U.S. troop strength in Afghanistan.[284] He announced an increase to U.S. troop levels of 17,000 in February 2009 to "stabilize a deteriorating situation in Afghanistan", an area he said had not received the "strategic attention, direction and resources it urgently requires".[285] He replaced the military commander in Afghanistan, General David D. McKiernan, with former Special Forces commander Lt. Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal in May 2009, indicating that McChrystal's Special Forces experience would facilitate the use of counterinsurgency tactics in the war.[286] On December 1, 2009, Obama announced the deployment of an additional 30,000 military personnel to Afghanistan and proposed to begin troop withdrawals 18 months from that date;[287] this took place in July 2011. David Petraeus replaced McChrystal in June 2010, after McChrystal's staff criticized White House personnel in a magazine article.[288] In February 2013, Obama said the U.S. military would reduce the troop level in Afghanistan from 68,000 to 34,000 U.S. troops by February 2014.[289]

In October 2015, in light of the deteriorating security situation, the White House announced a plan to keep U.S. Forces in Afghanistan indefinitely.[290]

Israel
President Barack Obama, at left, shakes hands with Israeli President Shimon Peres, at right, in the Oval Office on Tuesday, May 5, 2009. Standing at right looking on is U.S. Vice President Joe Biden.
Obama meeting with Israeli President Shimon Peres, May 2009
In 2011, the United States vetoed a Security Council resolution condemning Israeli settlements, with the United States being the only nation to do so.[291] Obama supports the two-state solution to the ArabCIsraeli conflict based on the 1967 borders with land swaps.[292]

In June 2012, Obama said that the bond between the United States and Israel is "unbreakable."[293] During the initial years of the Obama administration, the U.S. increased military cooperation with Israel, including increased military aid, re-establishment of the U.S.-Israeli Joint Political Military Group and the Defense Policy Advisory Group, and an increase in visits among high-level military officials of both countries.[294] The Obama administration asked Congress to allocate money toward funding the Iron Dome program in response to the waves of Palestinian rocket attacks on Israel.[295]

In 2013, Jeffrey Goldberg reported that, in Obama's view, "with each new settlement announcement, Netanyahu is moving his country down a path toward near-total isolation."[296]

In 2014, President Obama likened the Zionist movement to the Civil Rights Movement in the United States. He said that both movements seek to bring justice and equal rights to historically persecuted peoples. He explained, "To me, being pro-Israel and pro-Jewish is part and parcel with the values that I've been fighting for since I was politically conscious and started getting involved in politics."[297]

Libya
Main article: 2011 military intervention in Libya

President Obama meets with Russian President Vladimir Putin to discuss Syria and Daesh, September 29, 2015
In February 2011, protests in Libya began against long-time dictator Muammar Gaddafi as part of the Arab Spring. They soon turned violent. In March, as forces loyal to Gaddafi advanced on rebels across Libya, calls for a no-fly zone came from around the world, including Europe, the Arab League, and a resolution[298] passed unanimously by the U.S. Senate.[299] In response to the unanimous passage of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973 on March 17, Gaddafiwho had previously vowed to "show no mercy" to the rebels of Benghazi[300]announced an immediate cessation of military activities,[301] yet reports came in that his forces continued shelling Misrata. The next day, on Obama's orders, the U.S. military took part in air strikes to destroy the Libyan government's air defense capabilities to protect civilians and enforce a no-fly-zone,[302] including the use of Tomahawk missiles, B-2 Spirits, and fighter jets.[303][304][305] Six days later, on March 25, by unanimous vote of all of its 28 members, NATO took over leadership of the effort, dubbed Operation Unified Protector.[306] Some Representatives[307] questioned whether Obama had the constitutional authority to order military action in addition to questioning its cost, structure and aftermath.[308][309]

Syrian Civil War
On October 18, 2011, during the early stages of the Syrian Civil War, Obama said that "Assad must go", saying that this was for the sake of the Syrian people.[310] He reaffirmed that belief on November 19, 2015.[311] To that end, Obama authorized an effort to train anti-Assad rebels.[312] The program achieved minimal results, and the Obama Administration abandoned it in 2015.[313][314] In the wake of a chemical weapons attack in Syria in 2013 widely blamed on the Assad regime, Obama insisted that Assad must give up his chemical weapons. This led to an agreement which resulted in Assad giving up many such weapons, but attacks with chlorine gas continued.[315][316] In 2014, Obama authorized an air campaign aimed primarily at Daesh, but repeatedly promised that the U.S. would put "no boots on the ground" in Syria.[317][318]

Osama bin Laden
Main article: Death of Osama bin Laden
President Obama on Osama bin Laden's Death
File:President Obama on Death of Osama bin Laden.ogv
President Obama's address (Full Text) Wikisource has information on "Remarks by the President on Osama bin Laden"
President Obama on Osama bin Laden's Death
MENU0:00
audio only version
Problems playing these files? See media help.
President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden, along with members of the national security team, receive an update on Operation Neptune's Spear, a mission against Osama bin Laden, in one of the conference rooms of the Situation Room of the White House, on May 1, 2011. They are watching live feed from drones operating over the bin Laden complex.
President Barack Obama along with members of the national security team, receive an update on Operation Neptune's Spear, in the White House Situation Room, May 1, 2011. See also: Situation Room
Starting with information received in July 2010, intelligence developed by the CIA over the next several months determined what they believed to be the location of Osama bin Laden in a large compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan, a suburban area 35 miles from Islamabad.[319] CIA head Leon Panetta reported this intelligence to President Obama in March 2011.[319] Meeting with his national security advisers over the course of the next six weeks, Obama rejected a plan to bomb the compound, and authorized a "surgical raid" to be conducted by United States Navy SEALs.[319] The operation took place on May 1, 2011, resulting in the death of bin Laden and the seizure of papers, computer drives and disks from the compound.[320][321] DNA testing identified bin Laden's body,[322] which was buried at sea several hours later.[323] Within minutes of the President's announcement from Washington, DC, late in the evening on May 1, there were spontaneous celebrations around the country as crowds gathered outside the White House, and at New York City's Ground Zero and Times Square.[320][324] Reaction to the announcement was positive across party lines, including from former presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush,[325] and from many countries around the world.[326]

Iran nuclear talks

Obama talks with Benjamin Netanyahu, March 2013
Main article: Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
In November 2013, Obama's administration opened negotiations with Iran to prevent it from acquiring nuclear weapons, which included an interim agreement. Negotiations took two years with numerous delays, with a deal being announced July 14, 2015. The deal, titled Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, saw the removal of sanctions in exchange for measures that would prevent Iran from producing nuclear weapons. While Obama hailed the agreement as being a step towards a more hopeful world, the deal drew strong criticism from Republican and conservative quarters, and from Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu.[327][328][329]

Relations with Cuba
Main article: United StatesCCuban Thaw

Meeting between President Obama and Cuban President Ral Castro in Panama, April 2015
Since the spring of 2013, secret meetings were conducted between the United States and Cuba in the neutral locations of Canada and Vatican City.[330] The Vatican first became involved in 2013 when Pope Francis advised the U.S. and Cuba to exchange prisoners as a gesture of goodwill.[331] On December 10, 2013, Cuban President Ral Castro, in a significant public moment, greeted and shook hands with Obama at the Nelson Mandela memorial service in Johannesburg.[332]

In December 2014, after the secret meetings, it was announced that Obama, with Pope Francis as an intermediary, had negotiated a restoration of relations with Cuba, after nearly sixty years of dtente.[333] Popularly dubbed the Cuban Thaw, The New Republic deemed the Cuban Thaw to be "Obama's finest foreign policy achievement."[334] On July 1, 2015, President Barack Obama announced that formal diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United States would resume, and embassies would be opened in Washington and Havana.[335] The countries' respective "interests sections" in one another's capitals were upgraded to embassies on July 20 and August 13, 2015, respectively.[336]

Obama has visited Havana, Cuba for two days in March 2016, becoming the first sitting U.S. President to arrive since Calvin Coolidge in 1928.[337]

Africa
Obama spoke in front of the African Union in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on July 29, 2015, the first sitting U.S. president to do so. He gave a speech encouraging the world to increase economic ties via investments and trade with the continent, and lauded the progresses made in education, infrastructure, and economy. He also criticized the lack of democracy and leaders who refuse to step aside, discrimination against minorities (LGBT people, religious groups and ethnicities), and corruption. He suggested an intensified democratization and free trade, to significantly improve the quality of life for Africans.[338][339] During his July 2015 trip, Obama also was the first U.S. president ever to visit Kenya, which is the homeland of his father.[340]

Japan
See also: ja:?uL
On May 27, 2016, the 71st anniversary of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima by America, Obama became the first sitting American president to visit Hiroshima, Japan. Accompanied by Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, Obama paid tribute to the victims of the bombing at the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum.[341]

Cultural and political image
Main article: Public image of Barack Obama
See also: International media reaction to the United States presidential election, 2008 and International reactions to the United States presidential election, 2012
First official presidential portrait of Barack Obama, wearing a black suit with a blue tie and American flag lapel pin, indoors with the American flag and the flag of the President draped in the background
Obama's first term presidential portrait (2009)
Obama's family history, upbringing, and Ivy League education differ markedly from those of African-American politicians who launched their careers in the 1960s through participation in the civil rights movement.[342] Expressing puzzlement over questions about whether he is "black enough", Obama told an August 2007 meeting of the National Association of Black Journalists that "we're still locked in this notion that if you appeal to white folks then there must be something wrong."[343] Obama acknowledged his youthful image in an October 2007 campaign speech, saying: "I wouldn't be here if, time and again, the torch had not been passed to a new generation."[344]

Obama is frequently referred to as an exceptional orator.[345] During his pre-inauguration transition period and continuing into his presidency, Obama has delivered a series of weekly Internet video addresses.[346] Former presidential campaign surrogate and Georgetown professor, Michael Eric Dyson, is both critical and sympathetic of President Obama's leadership in race relations indicating that speeches and action on racial disparity and justice have been somewhat reactive and reluctant when in the later part of his second term, racial violence demanded immediate presidential action and conversation.[347]

President Barack Obama, seated at right, answers questions about the State of the Union posed by citizens, shown on a flat-screen monitor at left, in the first-ever completely virtual interview from the White House. This interview aired on the official White House Google+ page on January 30, 2012.
Obama conducting the first completely virtual interview from the White House in 2012[348]
According to the Gallup Organization, Obama began his presidency with a 68 percent approval rating[349] before gradually declining for the rest of the year, and eventually bottoming out at 41 percent in August 2010,[350] a trend similar to Ronald Reagan's and Bill Clinton's first years in office.[351] He experienced a small poll bounce shortly after the death of Osama bin Laden on May 2, 2011. This bounce lasted until around June 2011, when his approval numbers dropped back to where they were previously.[352][353] His approval ratings rebounded around the same time as his reelection in 2012, with polls showing an average job approval of 52 percent shortly after his second inauguration.[354] Despite him dropping to 39 percent in his approval ratings in late-2013 due to the ACA roll-out, he has climbed to 50 percent in late January 2015 according to Gallup.[355] Polls show strong support for Obama in other countries,[356] and before being elected President he met with prominent foreign figures including former British Prime Minister Tony Blair,[357] Italy's Democratic Party leader and Mayor of Rome Walter Veltroni,[358] and French President Nicolas Sarkozy.[359]

In a February 2009 poll conducted in Western Europe and the U.S. by Harris Interactive for France 24 and the International Herald Tribune, Obama was rated as the most respected world leader, as well as the most powerful.[360] In a similar poll conducted by Harris in May 2009, Obama was rated as the most popular world leader, as well as the one figure most people would pin their hopes on for pulling the world out of the economic downturn.[361][362]

Prime Minister David Cameron of the United Kingdom, President Barack Obama, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, Jos Manuel Barroso, President of the European Commission, President Fran?ois Hollande of France and others react emotionally while watching the overtime shootout of the Chelsea vs. Bayern Munich Champions League final, in the Laurel Cabin conference room during the G8 Summit at Camp David, Maryland, May 19, 2012. Cameron raises his arms triumphantly as the Chelsea team wins their first Champions League title in the overtime shootout.
G8 leaders watching the 2012 UEFA Champions League Final
Obama won Best Spoken Word Album Grammy Awards for abridged audiobook versions of Dreams from My Father in February 2006 and for The Audacity of Hope in February 2008.[363] His concession speech after the New Hampshire primary was set to music by independent artists as the music video "Yes We Can", which was viewed 10 million times on YouTube in its first month[364] and received a Daytime Emmy Award.[365] In December 2008 and in 2012, Time magazine named Obama as its Person of the Year.[366] The 2008 awarding was for his historic candidacy and election, which Time described as "the steady march of seemingly impossible accomplishments".[367] On May 25, 2011, Obama became the first President of the United States to address both houses of the UK Parliament in Westminster Hall, London. This was only the 5th occurrence since the start of the 20th century, of a head of state being extended this invitation, following Charles de Gaulle in 1960, Nelson Mandela in 1996, Queen Elizabeth II in 2002 and Pope Benedict XVI in 2010.[368][369]

On October 9, 2009, the Norwegian Nobel Committee announced that Obama had won the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize "for his extraordinary efforts to strengthen international diplomacy and cooperation between peoples".[370] Obama accepted this award in Oslo, Norway on December 10, 2009, with "deep gratitude and great humility."[371] The award drew a mixture of praise and criticism from world leaders and media figures.[372][373][374][375][376][377][378] Obama's peace prize was called a "stunning surprise" by The New York Times.[379] Obama is the fourth U.S. president to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize and the third to become a Nobel laureate while in office.[380] Obama's Nobel Prize has been viewed skeptically in subsequent years, especially after the director of the Nobel Institute, Geir Lundestad, said Obama's Peace Prize did not have the desired effect.[381]

Family and personal life
Main article: Family of Barack Obama

Obama posing in the Green Room of the White House with wife Michelle and daughters Sasha and Malia in 2009
In a 2006 interview, Obama highlighted the diversity of his extended family: "It's like a little mini-United Nations", he said. "I've got relatives who look like Bernie Mac, and I've got relatives who look like Margaret Thatcher."[382] Obama has a half-sister with whom he was raised (Maya Soetoro-Ng, the daughter of his mother and her Indonesian second husband) and seven half-siblings from his Kenyan father's familysix of them living.[383] Obama's mother was survived by her Kansas-born mother, Madelyn Dunham,[384] until her death on November 2, 2008,[385] two days before his election to the Presidency. Obama also has roots in Ireland; he met with his Irish cousins in Moneygall in May 2011.[386] In Dreams from My Father, Obama ties his mother's family history to possible Native American ancestors and distant relatives of Jefferson Davis, President of the Confederate States of America during the American Civil War.[387]

Besides his native English, Obama speaks some basic Indonesian, having learned the language during his four childhood years in Jakarta.[388][389] He plays basketball, a sport he participated in as a member of his high school's varsity team;[390] he is left-handed.[391]

Obama about to take a shot while three other players look at him. One of those players is holding is arms up in an attempt to block Obama.
Obama taking a shot during a game on the White House basketball court, 2009
Obama is a supporter of the Chicago White Sox, and he threw out the first pitch at the 2005 ALCS when he was still a senator.[392] In 2009, he threw out the ceremonial first pitch at the All-Star Game while wearing a White Sox jacket.[393] He is also primarily a Chicago Bears football fan in the NFL, but in his childhood and adolescence was a fan of the Pittsburgh Steelers, and rooted for them ahead of their victory in Super Bowl XLIII 12 days after he took office as President.[394] In 2011, Obama invited the 1985 Chicago Bears to the White House; the team had not visited the White House after their Super Bowl win in 1986 due to the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster.[395]


Obama and First Lady at the Civil Rights Summit at the LBJ Presidential Library in 2014
In June 1989, Obama met Michelle Robinson when he was employed as a summer associate at the Chicago law firm of Sidley Austin.[396] Assigned for three months as Obama's adviser at the firm, Robinson joined him at several group social functions, but declined his initial requests to date.[397] They began dating later that summer, became engaged in 1991, and were married on October 3, 1992.[398] The couple's first daughter, Malia Ann, was born on July 4, 1998,[399] followed by a second daughter, Natasha ("Sasha"), on June 10, 2001.[400] The Obama daughters attended the private University of Chicago Laboratory Schools. When they moved to Washington, D.C., in January 2009, the girls started at the private Sidwell Friends School.[401] The Obamas have two Portuguese Water Dogs, the first, a male named Bo, a gift from Senator Ted Kennedy.[402] In August 2013, Bo was joined by Sunny, a female.[403]

Applying the proceeds of a book deal, the family moved in 2005 from a Hyde Park, Chicago condominium to a $1.6 million house in neighboring Kenwood, Chicago.[404] The purchase of an adjacent lotand sale of part of it to Obama by the wife of developer, campaign donor and friend Tony Rezkoattracted media attention because of Rezko's subsequent indictment and conviction on political corruption charges that were unrelated to Obama.[405]

In December 2007, Money estimated the Obama family's net worth at $1.3 million.[406] Their 2009 tax return showed a household income of $5.5 millionup from about $4.2 million in 2007 and $1.6 million in 2005mostly from sales of his books.[407][408] On his 2010 income of $1.7 million, he gave 14 percent to non-profit organizations, including $131,000 to Fisher House Foundation, a charity assisting wounded veterans' families, allowing them to reside near where the veteran is receiving medical treatments.[409][410] As per his 2012 financial disclosure, Obama may be worth as much as $10 million.[411]

Obama tried to quit smoking several times, sometimes using nicotine replacement therapy, and, in early 2010, Michelle Obama said that he had successfully quit smoking.[412][413]

Religious views
See also: Barack Obama religion conspiracy theories

Obama and First Lady worship at African Methodist Episcopal Church in Washington, D.C., January 2013
Obama is a Protestant Christian whose religious views developed in his adult life.[414] He wrote in The Audacity of Hope that he "was not raised in a religious household". He described his mother, raised by non-religious parents, as being detached from religion, yet "in many ways the most spiritually awakened person that I have ever known." He described his father as a "confirmed atheist" by the time his parents met, and his stepfather as "a man who saw religion as not particularly useful." Obama explained how, through working with black churches as a community organizer while in his twenties, he came to understand "the power of the African-American religious tradition to spur social change."[415]

In January 2008, Obama told Christianity Today: "I am a Christian, and I am a devout Christian. I believe in the redemptive death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. I believe that faith gives me a path to be cleansed of sin and have eternal life."[416] On September 27, 2010, Obama released a statement commenting on his religious views saying "I'm a Christian by choice. My family didn't C frankly, they weren't folks who went to church every week. And my mother was one of the most spiritual people I knew, but she didn't raise me in the church. So I came to my Christian faith later in life, and it was because the precepts of Jesus Christ spoke to me in terms of the kind of life that I would want to lead C being my brothers' and sisters' keeper, treating others as they would treat me."[417][418]

Obama met Trinity United Church of Christ pastor Rev. Jeremiah Wright in October 1987, and became a member of Trinity in 1992.[419] He resigned from Trinity in May 2008 during his first presidential campaign after some of Wright's statements were criticized.[420] The Obama family has attended several Protestant churches since moving to Washington, D.C. in 2009, including Shiloh Baptist Church and St. John's Episcopal Church. After a prolonged effort to find a church to attend regularly in Washington, Obama announced in June 2009 that his primary place of worship would be the Evergreen Chapel at Camp David.[421]

Notes and references
Notes
Jump up ^ "Barak". Merriam-Webster Dictionary., "Hussein". Merriam-Webster Dictionary., "Obama". Merriam-Webster Dictionary..
Jump up ^ "Barak". Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House. "Hussein". Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House. "Obama". Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House.
Jump up ^ "President Barack Obama". Washington, D.C.: The White House. 2008. Retrieved December 12, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Certificate of Live Birth: Barack Hussein Obama II, August 4, 1961, 7:24 pm, Honolulu" (PDF). Department of Health, State of Hawaii. The White House. April 27, 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 29, 2011. Retrieved April 27, 2011.
Jump up ^ Maraniss, David (August 24, 2008). "Though Obama had to leave to find himself, it is Hawaii that made his rise possible". The Washington Post. p. A22. Retrieved October 28, 2008.
Jump up ^ Nakaso, Dan (December 22, 2008). "Twin sisters, Obama on parallel paths for years". The Honolulu Advertiser. p. B1. Retrieved January 22, 2011.
Jump up ^ Rudin, Ken (December 23, 2009). "Today's Junkie segment on TOTN: a political review Of 2009". Talk of the Nation (Political Junkie blog). NPR. Retrieved April 18, 2010. We began with the historic inauguration on January 20 C yes, the first president ever born in Hawaii
Jump up ^ Obama (1995, 2004), p. 12.
Jump up ^ Jones, Tim (March 27, 2007). "Barack Obama: Mother not just a girl from Kansas; Stanley Ann Dunham shaped a future senator". Chicago Tribune. p. 1 (Tempo).
^ Jump up to: a b Obama (1995, 2004), pp. 9C10.
Scott (2011), pp. 80C86.
Jacobs (2011), pp. 115C118.
Maraniss (2012), pp. 154C160.
Jump up ^ Ripley, Amanda (April 9, 2008). "The story of Barack Obama's mother". Time (New York). Retrieved April 9, 2007.
Jump up ^ Scott (2011), p. 86.
Jacobs (2011), pp. 125C127.
Maraniss (2012), pp. 160C163.
Jump up ^ Scott (2011), pp. 87C93.
Jacobs (2011), pp. 115C118, 125C127, 133C161.
Maraniss (2012), pp. 170C183, 188C189.
Jump up ^ Scott (2011), pp. 142C144.
Jacobs (2011), pp. 161C177, 227C230.
Maraniss (2012), pp. 190C194, 201C209, 227C230.
Jump up ^ Ochieng, Philip (November 1, 2004). "From home squared to the US Senate: how Barack Obama was lost and found". The EastAfrican (Nairobi). Archived from the original on September 27, 2007.
Merida, Kevin (December 14, 2007). "The ghost of a father". The Washington Post. p. A12. Retrieved June 25, 2008.
Jacobs (2011), pp. 251C255.
Maraniss (2012), pp. 411C417.
Jump up ^ Scott (2011), pp. 97C103.
Maraniss (2012), pp. 195C201, 225C230.
Jump up ^ Maraniss (2012), pp. 195C201, 209C223, 230C244.
Jump up ^ Maraniss (2012), pp. 216, 221, 230, 234C244.
Jump up ^ "Barack Obama: Calvert Homeschooler? C Calvert Education Blog". calverteducation.com. Retrieved November 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ Serafin, Peter (March 21, 2004). "Punahou grad stirs up Illinois politics". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. Retrieved March 20, 2008.
Scott, Janny (March 14, 2008). "A free-spirited wanderer who set Obama's path". The New York Times. p. A1. Retrieved November 18, 2011.
Obama (1995, 2004), Chapters 3 and 4.
Scott (2012), pp. 131C134.
Maraniss (2012), pp. 264C269.
Jump up ^ Wolffe, Richard (March 22, 2008). "When Barry Became Barack". Newsweek. Retrieved March 21, 2016.
Jump up ^ Scott (2011), pp. 139C157.
Maraniss (2012), pp. 279C281.
Jump up ^ Scott (2011), pp. 157C194.
Maraniss (2012), pp. 279C281, 324C326.
Jump up ^ Scott (2011), pp. 214, 294, 317C346.
Jump up ^ Serrano, Richard A. (March 11, 2007). "Obama's peers didn't see his angst". Los Angeles Times. p. A20. Retrieved March 13, 2007.
Obama (1995, 2004), Chapters 4 and 5.
Jump up ^ Reyes, B.J. (February 8, 2007). "Punahou left lasting impression on Obama". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. Retrieved February 10, 2007. As a teenager, Obama went to parties and sometimes sought out gatherings on military bases or at the University of Hawaii that were mostly attended by blacks.
Jump up ^ Elliott, Philip (November 21, 2007). "Obama gets blunt with N.H. students". Boston Globe. Associated Press. p. 8A. Retrieved May 18, 2012.
Jump up ^ Karl, Jonathan (May 25, 2012). "Obama and his pot-smoking "choom gang"". ABC News. Retrieved May 25, 2012.
Obama, Barack (2004) [1995]. Dreams from My Father: A Story of Race and Inheritance. pp. 93C94. Retrieved June 3, 2016.
Maraniss, David (2012). Barack Obama: The Story. pages with "choom gang". Retrieved June 3, 2016.
for analysis of the political impact of the quote and Obama's more recent admission that he smoked marijuana as a teenager ("When I was a kid, I inhaled"), see:
Seelye, Katharine Q. (October 24, 2006). "Obama offers more variations from the norm". The New York Times. p. A21. Retrieved October 29, 2006.
Romano, Lois (January 3, 2007). "Effect of Obama's candor remains to be seen". The Washington Post. p. A1. Retrieved January 14, 2007.
Jump up ^ "FRONTLINE The Choice 2012". PBS. October 9, 2012. Retrieved October 29, 2012.
^ Jump up to: a b Gordon, Larry (January 29, 2007). "Occidental recalls 'Barry' Obama". Los Angeles Times. p. B1. Archived from the original on May 24, 2010. Retrieved May 12, 2010.
Possley, Maurice (March 30, 2007). "Activism blossomed in college". Chicago Tribune. p. 20. Archived from the original on October 9, 2010. Retrieved May 12, 2010.
Kovaleski, Serge F. (February 9, 2008). "Old friends say drugs played bit part in Obama's young life". The New York Times. p. A1. Retrieved May 12, 2010.
Rohter, Larry (April 10, 2008). "Obama says real-life experience trumps rivals' foreign policy credits". The New York Times. p. A18. Retrieved May 12, 2010.
Adam Goldman; Robert Tanner (May 15, 2008). "Old friends recall Obama's years in LA, NYC". USA Today. Associated Press. Retrieved May 12, 2010.
Helman, Scott (August 25, 2008). "Small college awakened future senator to service (subscription archive)". Boston Globe. p. 1A. Retrieved May 12, 2010.
Jackson, Brooks (June 5, 2009). "More 'birther' nonsense: Obama's 1981 Pakistan trip". FactCheck.org. Retrieved May 12, 2010.
Remnick, David (2010). The Bridge: The Life and Rise of Barack Obama. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. pp. 98C112. ISBN 978-1-4000-4360-6.
Obama (1995, 2004), pp. 92C112.
Mendell (2007), pp. 55C62.
Jump up ^ Boss-Bicak, Shira (January 2005). "Barack Obama '83". Columbia College Today. ISSN 0572-7820. Retrieved October 1, 2006.
Jump up ^ "The Approval Matrix". New York. August 27, 2012.
Jump up ^ Obama, Barack (1998). "Curriculum vitae". The University of Chicago Law School. Archived from the original on May 9, 2001. Retrieved October 1, 2006.
Issenberg, Sasha (August 6, 2008). "Obama shows hints of his year in global finance; Tied markets to social aid". Boston Globe. p. 1A. Archived from the original on August 9, 2008. Retrieved August 6, 2008.
Jump up ^ Scott, Janny (July 30, 2007). "Obama's account of New York often differs from what others say". The New York Times. p. B1. Retrieved July 31, 2007.
Obama (1995, 2004), pp. 133C140.
Mendell (2007), pp. 62C63.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Chassie, Karen, ed. (2007). Who's Who in America, 2008. New Providence, NJ: Marquis Who's Who. p. 3468. ISBN 978-0-8379-7011-0.
Jump up ^ Fink, Jason (November 9, 2008). "Obama stood out, even during brief 1985 NYPIRG job". Newsday.
Jump up ^ Lizza, Ryan (March 19, 2007). "The agitator: Barack Obama's unlikely political education". The New Republic 236 (12): 22C26, 28C29. ISSN 0028-6583. Retrieved August 21, 2007.
Bob Secter; John McCormick (March 30, 2007). "Portrait of a pragmatist". Chicago Tribune. p. 1. Archived from the original on December 14, 2009. Retrieved May 18, 2012.
Obama (1995, 2004), pp. 140C295.
Mendell (2007), pp. 63C83.
^ Jump up to: a b c Matchan, Linda (February 15, 1990). "A Law Review breakthrough". Boston Globe. p. 29. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
Corr, John (February 27, 1990). "From mean streets to hallowed halls" (paid archive). The Philadelphia Inquirer. p. C01. Retrieved June 6, 2008.
Jump up ^ Obama, Barack (AugustCSeptember 1988). "Why organize? Problems and promise in the inner city". Illinois Issues 14 (8C9): 40C42. ISSN 0738-9663. reprinted in:
Knoepfle, Peg, ed. (1990). After Alinsky: community organizing in Illinois. Springfield, IL: Sangamon State University. pp. 35C40. ISBN 0-9620873-3-5. He has also been a consultant and instructor for the Gamaliel Foundation, an organizing institute working throughout the Midwest.
Jump up ^ Obama, Auma (2012). And then life happens: a memoir. New York: St. Martin's Press. pp. 189C208, 212C216. ISBN 978-1-250-01005-6.
Jump up ^ Obama (1995, 2004), pp. 299C437.
Maraniss (2012), pp. 564C570.
Jump up ^ Joey Del Ponte and Somerville Scout Staff. "Something in the Water". Somerville Scout (January/February 2014). p. 26. "Barack Obama lived in the big, ivy-covered brick building at 365 Broadway....From 1988 to 1991, the future president resided in a basement apartment while attending Harvard Law School."
^ Jump up to: a b Michael Levenson; Jonathan Saltzman (January 28, 2007). "At Harvard Law, a unifying voice". Boston Globe. p. 1A. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
Kantor, Jodi (January 28, 2007). "In law school, Obama found political voice". The New York Times. p. A1. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
Mundy, Liza (August 12, 2007). "A series of fortunate events". The Washington Post. p. W10. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
Mendell (2007), pp. 80C92.
^ Jump up to: a b Butterfield, Fox (February 6, 1990). "First black elected to head Harvard's Law Review". The New York Times. p. A20. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
Ybarra, Michael J (February 7, 1990). "Activist in Chicago now heads Harvard Law Review". Chicago Tribune. p. 3. Retrieved October 29, 2011.
Drummond, Tammerlin (March 12, 1990). "Barack Obama's law; Harvard Law Review's first black president plans a life of public service" (paid archive). Los Angeles Times. p. E1. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
Evans, Gaynelle (March 15, 1990). "Opening another door: The saga of Harvard's Barack H. Obama". Black Issues in Higher Education 7 (1): 5. ISSN 0742-0277. Retrieved May 18, 2012.
Pugh, Allison J. (April 18, 1990). "Law Review's first black president aims to help poor". The Miami Herald. Associated Press. p. C01. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
Jump up ^ Video on YouTube
Jump up ^ Aguilar, Louis (July 11, 1990). "Survey: Law firms slow to add minority partners". Chicago Tribune. p. 1 (Business). Retrieved June 15, 2008.
Jump up ^ Adams, Richard (May 9, 2007). "Barack Obama". The Guardian (London). Archived from the original on October 13, 2008. Retrieved October 26, 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b c Scott, Janny (May 18, 2008). "The story of Obama, written by Obama". The New York Times. p. A1. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
Obama (1995, 2004), pp. xiiiCxvii.
Jump up ^ Merriner, James L. (June 2008). "The friends of O". Chicago 57 (6): 74C79, 97C99. ISSN 0362-4595. Retrieved January 30, 2010.
Zengerle, Jason (July 30, 2008). "Con law; What the University of Chicago right thinks of Obama". The New Republic 239 (1). pp. 7C8. Retrieved January 30, 2010.
Kantor, Jodi (July 30, 2008). "Teaching law, testing ideas, Obama stood slightly apart". The New York Times. p. A1. Retrieved January 30, 2010.
Gray, Steven (September 10, 2008). "Taking professor Obama's class". Time (New York). Retrieved January 30, 2010.
Starr, Alexandra (September 21, 2008). "Case study". The New York Times Magazine. p. 76. Retrieved January 30, 2010.
Hundley, Tom (March 22, 2009). "Ivory tower of power". Chicago Tribune Magazine. p. 6. Retrieved January 30, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Statement regarding Barack Obama". University of Chicago Law School. March 27, 2008. Archived from the original on June 8, 2008. Retrieved June 5, 2008.
Miller, Joe (March 28, 2008). "Was Barack Obama really a constitutional law professor?". FactCheck.org. Retrieved May 18, 2012.
Holan, Angie Drobnic (March 7, 2008). "Obama's 20 years of experience". PolitiFact.com. Retrieved June 10, 2008.
Jump up ^ White, Jesse, ed. (2000). Illinois Blue Book, 2000, Millennium ed. (PDF). Springfield, IL: Illinois Secretary of State. p. 83. OCLC 43923973. Archived from the original on April 16, 2004. Retrieved June 6, 2008.
Jarrett, Vernon (August 11, 1992). "'Project Vote' brings power to the people" (paid archive). Chicago Sun-Times. p. 23. Retrieved June 6, 2008.
Reynolds, Gretchen (January 1993). "Vote of confidence". Chicago Magazine 42 (1). pp. 53C54. ISSN 0362-4595. Archived from the original on May 14, 2008. Retrieved June 6, 2008.
Anderson, Veronica (September 27 C October 3, 1993). "40 under Forty: Barack Obama, Director, Illinois Project Vote". Crain's Chicago Business 16 (39): 43. ISSN 0149-6956.
Jump up ^ United States District Court: Northern District of Illinois - CM/ECF LIVE, Ver 3.0 (Chicago) (July 6, 1994). "CIVIL DOCKET FOR CASE #: 1:94-cv-04094" (PDF). clearinghouse.net. Retrieved June 3, 2016.
Jump up ^ "Buycks-Roberson v. Citibank Fed. Sav. Bank C Civil Rights Litigation Clearinghouse". clearinghouse.net. Retrieved November 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT~':lj FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF ILLINOIS EASTERN DIVISION (January 16, 1988). "Settlement Agreement" (PDF). clearinghouse.net. Retrieved June 3, 2016.
Jump up ^ United States District Cuurt For the Northern District of Illinois Eastern Division (May 13, 1998). "Final Judgment and Order of Dismissal" (PDF). clearinghouse.net. Retrieved June 3, 2016.
Jump up ^ Gore, D'Angelo (June 14, 2012). "The Obamas' Law Licenses". FactCheck.org. Retrieved July 16, 2012.
Jump up ^ Robinson, Mike (February 20, 2007). "Obama got start in civil rights practice". Boston Globe. Associated Press. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
Pallasch, Abdon M. (December 17, 2007). "As lawyer, Obama was strong, silent type; He was 'smart, innovative, relentless,' and he mostly let other lawyers do the talking". Chicago Sun-Times. p. 4. Retrieved June 15, 2008.(subscription required)
Morain, Dan (April 6, 2008). "Obama's law days effective but brief". Los Angeles Times. p. A14. Retrieved February 14, 2010.
"Document". Chicago Tribune. June 27, 1993. p. 9 (Business). Archived from the original on December 4, 2013. Retrieved June 15, 2008.(subscription required)
"Business appointments". Chicago-Sun-Times. July 5, 1993. p. 40. Retrieved June 15, 2008.(subscription required)
Ripley, Amanda (November 3, 2004). "Obama's ascent". Time (New York). Retrieved February 13, 2010.
"About us". Miner, Barnhill & Galland C Chicago, Illinois. 2008. Archived from the original on July 20, 2008. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
Reardon, Patrick T. (June 25, 2008). "Obama's Chicago". Chicago Tribune. p. 1 (Tempo). Retrieved February 13, 2010.
Obama (1995, 2004), pp. 438C439.
Mendell (2007), pp. 104C106.
Jump up ^ Jackson, David; Ray Long (April 3, 2007). "Obama Knows His Way Around a Ballot". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on October 11, 2008. Retrieved May 18, 2012.
White, Jesse (2001). "Legislative Districts of Cook County, 1991 Reapportionment" (PDF). Illinois Blue Book 2001C2002. Springfield: Illinois Secretary of State. p. 65. Retrieved July 16, 2011. State Sen. District 13 = State Rep. Districts 25 & 26.
Jump up ^ Slevin, Peter (February 9, 2007). "Obama Forged Political Mettle in Illinois Capitol". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 20, 2008.Helman, Scott (September 23, 2007). "In Illinois, Obama dealt with Lobbyists". Boston Globe. Archived from the original on April 16, 2008. Retrieved April 20, 2008. See also:"Obama Record May Be Gold Mine for Critics". CBS News. Associated Press. January 17, 2007. Archived from the original on April 12, 2008. Retrieved April 20, 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b Scott, Janny (July 30, 2007). "In Illinois, Obama Proved Pragmatic and Shrewd". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 10, 2008. Retrieved April 20, 2008.
Jump up ^ Allison, Melissa (December 15, 2000). "State takes on predatory lending; Rules would halt single-premium life insurance financing" (paid archive). Chicago Tribune. p. 1 (Business). Archived from the original on June 17, 2008. Retrieved June 1, 2008.Ray Long; Melissa Allison (April 18, 2001). "Illinois OKs predatory loan curbs; State aims to avert home foreclosures" (paid archive). Chicago Tribune. p. 1. Retrieved June 1, 2008.
Jump up ^ "13th District: Barack Obama". Illinois State Senate Democrats. August 24, 2000. Archived from the original on April 12, 2000. Retrieved April 20, 2008."13th District: Barack Obama". Illinois State Senate Democrats. October 9, 2004. Archived from the original on August 2, 2004. Retrieved April 20, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Federal Elections 2000: U.S. House Results C Illinois". Federal Election Commission. Archived from the original on March 28, 2008. Retrieved April 24, 2008.
Gonyea, Dan (September 19, 2007). "Obama's Loss May Have Aided White House Bid". NPR. Archived from the original on February 18, 2011.
Scott, Janny (September 9, 2007). "A Streetwise Veteran Schooled Young Obama". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 21, 2008. Retrieved April 20, 2008.
McClelland, Edward (February 12, 2007). "How Obama Learned to Be a Natural". Salon. Archived from the original on March 8, 2008. Retrieved April 20, 2008.
Wolffe, Richard; Daren Briscoe (July 16, 2007). "Across the Divide". Newsweek. Archived from the original on April 18, 2008. Retrieved April 20, 2008.
Helman, Scott (October 12, 2007). "Early Defeat Launched a Rapid Political Climb". Boston Globe. Retrieved April 20, 2008.
Wills, Christopher (October 24, 2007). "Obama learned from failed Congress run". USA Today. Retrieved November 15, 2010.
Jump up ^ Calmes, Jackie (February 23, 2007). "Statehouse Yields Clues to Obama". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on September 18, 2008. Retrieved April 20, 2008.
Jump up ^ Tavella, Anne Marie (April 14, 2003). "Profiling, taping plans pass Senate" (paid archive). Daily Herald. p. 17. Retrieved June 1, 2008.Haynes, V. Dion (June 29, 2003). "Fight racial profiling at local level, lawmaker says; U.S. guidelines get mixed review" (paid archive). Chicago Tribune. p. 8. Archived from the original on June 17, 2008. Retrieved June 1, 2008.Pearson, Rick (July 17, 2003). "Taped confessions to be law; State will be 1st to pass legislation" (paid archive). Chicago Tribune. p. 1 (Metro). Retrieved June 1, 2008.
Jump up ^ Youngman, Sam; Aaron Blake (March 14, 2007). "Obama's Crime Votes Are Fodder for Rivals". The Hill. Retrieved May 18, 2012. See also:"US Presidential Candidate Obama Cites Work on State Death Penalty Reforms". International Herald Tribune. Associated Press. November 12, 2007. Archived from the original on June 7, 2008. Retrieved May 18, 2012.
Jump up ^ Coffee, Melanie (November 6, 2004). "Attorney Chosen to Fill Obama's State Senate Seat". HPKCC. Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 16, 2008. Retrieved April 20, 2008.
Jump up ^ Helman, Scott (October 12, 2007). "Early defeat launched a rapid political climb". Boston Globe. p. 1A. Retrieved April 13, 2008.
Jump up ^ Strausberg, Chinta (September 26, 2002). "Opposition to war mounts" (paid archive). Chicago Defender. p. 1. Retrieved February 3, 2008.
Jump up ^ Office of the Press Secretary (October 2, 2002). "President, House leadership agree on Iraq resolution". The White House. Retrieved February 18, 2008.
Tackett, Michael (October 3, 2002). "Bush, House OK Iraq deal; Congress marches with Bush". Chicago Tribune. p. 1. Retrieved February 3, 2008.(subscription required)
Jump up ^ Glauber, Bill (October 3, 2003). "War protesters gentler, but passion still burns". Chicago Tribune. p. 1. Retrieved February 3, 2008.(subscription required)
Strausberg, Chinta (October 3, 2002). "War with Iraq undermines U.N". Chicago Defender. p. 1. Retrieved October 28, 2008. Photo caption: Left Photo: Sen. Barack Obama along with Rev. Jesse Jackson spoke to nearly 3,000 anti-war protestors (below) during a rally at Federal Plaza Wednesday.
Katz, Marilyn (October 2, 2007). "Five years since our first action". Chicagoans Against War & Injustice. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011. Retrieved February 18, 2008.
Greg Bryant; Jane B. Vaughn (October 3, 2002). "300 attend rally against Iraq war". Daily Herald (Arlington Heights). p. 8. Retrieved October 28, 2008.(subscription required)
Mendell (2007), pp. 172C177.
Jump up ^ Obama, Barack (October 2, 2002). "Remarks of Illinois State Sen. Barack Obama against going to war with Iraq". Barack Obama. Archived from the original on January 30, 2008. Retrieved February 3, 2008.
McCormick, John (October 3, 2007). "Obama marks '02 war speech; Contender highlights his early opposition in effort to distinguish him from his rivals". Chicago Tribune. p. 7. Retrieved October 28, 2008. The top strategist for Sen. Barack Obama has just 14 seconds of video of what is one of the most pivotal moments of the presidential candidate's political career. The video, obtained from a Chicago TV station, is of Obama's 2002 speech in opposition to the impending Iraq invasion.(subscription required)
Pallasch, Abdon M. (October 3, 2007). "Obama touts anti-war cred; Kicks off tour 5 years after speech critical of going to Iraq". Chicago Sun-Times. p. 26. Retrieved October 28, 2008.(subscription required)
Jump up ^ Ritter, Jim (March 17, 2003). "Anti-war rally here draws thousands". Chicago Sun-Times. p. 3. Retrieved February 3, 2008. (subscription required)
Office of the Press Secretary (March 16, 2003). "President Bush: Monday 'moment of truth' for world on Iraq" (Press release). The White House. Retrieved February 18, 2008.
Jump up ^ Davey, Monica (March 7, 2004). "Closely watched Illinois Senate race attracts 7 candidates in millionaire range". The New York Times. p. 19. Archived from the original on April 16, 2009. Retrieved April 13, 2008.
Jump up ^ Mendell, David (March 17, 2004). "Obama routs Democratic foes; Ryan tops crowded GOP field; Hynes, Hull fall far short across state". Chicago Tribune. p. 1. Retrieved March 1, 2009.
Davey, Monica (March 18, 2004). "As quickly as overnight, a Democratic star is born". The New York Times. p. A20. Retrieved March 1, 2009.
Howlett, Debbie (March 19, 2004). "Dems see a rising star in Illinois Senate candidate". USA Today. p. A04. Retrieved March 1, 2009.
Scheiber, Noam (May 31, 2004). "Race against history. Barack Obama's miraculous campaign". The New Republic 230 (20). pp. 21C22, 24C26 (cover story). Retrieved March 24, 2009.
Finnegan, William (May 31, 2004). "The Candidate. How far can Barack Obama go?". The New Yorker 20 (14). pp. 32C38. Retrieved March 24, 2009.
Dionne Jr., E.J. (June 25, 2004). "In Illinois, a star prepares". The Washington Post. p. A29. Retrieved March 24, 2009.
Scott, Janny (May 18, 2008). "The story of Obama, written by Obama". The New York Times. p. A1. Retrieved January 9, 2010.
Mendell (2007), pp. 235C259.
Jump up ^ Bernstein, David (June 2007). "The Speech". Chicago Magazine. Retrieved April 13, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Star Power. Showtime: Some are on the rise; others have long been fixtures in the firmament. A galaxy of bright Democratic lights". Newsweek (New York). August 2, 2004. pp. 48C51. Archived from the original on December 18, 2008. Retrieved November 15, 2008.
Samuel, Terence (August 2, 2004). "A shining star named Obama. How a most unlikely politician became a darling of the Democrats". U.S. News & World Report (Washington DC). p. 25. Archived from the original on December 6, 2008. Retrieved November 15, 2008.
Lizza, Ryan (September 2004). "Why is Barack Obama generating more excitement among Democrats than John Kerry?". The Atlantic Monthly. pp. 30, 33. Retrieved November 15, 2008.
Davey, Monica (July 26, 2004). "A surprise Senate contender reaches his biggest stage yet". The New York Times. p. A1. Retrieved November 25, 2010.
Leibovich, Mark (July 27, 2004). "The other man of the hour". The Washington Post. p. C1. Retrieved November 15, 2008.
Milligan, Susan (July 27, 2004). "In Obama, Democrats see their future". Boston Globe. p. B8. Archived from the original on December 18, 2008. Retrieved November 15, 2008.
Seelye, Katharine Q. (July 28, 2004). "Illinois Senate nominee speaks of encompassing unity". The New York Times. p. A1. Archived from the original on June 24, 2006.
Broder, David S. (July 28, 2004). "Democrats focus on healing divisions; Addressing convention, newcomers set themes". The Washington Post. p. A1. Retrieved November 15, 2008.
Jonathan Bing; Pamela McClintock (July 29, 2004). "Auds resist charms of Dem stars". Variety (Los Angeles). p. 1. Retrieved November 15, 2008.
Mendell (2007), pp. 272C285.
Jump up ^ "Ryan drops out of Senate race in Illinois". CNN. June 25, 2004. Retrieved May 18, 2012.
Mendell (2007), pp. 260C271.
Jump up ^ Lannan, Maura Kelly (August 9, 2004). "Alan Keyes enters U.S. Senate race in Illinois against rising Democratic star". Union-Tribune (San Diego). Associated Press. Retrieved April 13, 2008.
Jump up ^ "America Votes 2004: U.S. Senate / Illinois". CNN. 2005. Archived from the original on April 16, 2008. Retrieved April 13, 2008.
Slevin, Peter (November 13, 2007). "For Obama, a handsome payoff in political gambles". The Washington Post. p. A3. Retrieved April 13, 2008.
John Chase; David Mendell (November 3, 2004). "Obama scores a record landslide" (PDF). Chicago Tribune. p. 1. Retrieved April 3, 2009.
Fornek, Scott (November 3, 2004). "Obama takes Senate seat in a landslide". Chicago Sun-Times. p. 6. Retrieved April 3, 2009.
Jump up ^ United States Congress. "Barack Obama (id: o000167)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. Retrieved October 12, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Member Info". Congressional Black Caucus. Archived from the original on July 9, 2008. Retrieved June 25, 2008.
Jump up ^ Mason, Jeff (November 16, 2008). "Obama resigns Senate seat, thanks Illinois". Reuters. Retrieved March 10, 2009.
Jump up ^ U.S. Senate, 109th Congress, 1st Session (May 12, 2005). "S. 1033, Secure America and Orderly Immigration Act". Thomas. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ "LugarCObama Nonproliferation Legislation Signed into Law by the President". Richard Lugar U.S. Senate Office. January 11, 2007. Archived from the original on December 18, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2008. See also:Lugar, Richard G.; Barack Obama (December 3, 2005). "Junkyard Dogs of War". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ McCormack, John (December 21, 2007). "Google Government Gone Viral". Weekly Standard. Archived from the original on April 23, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2008. See also:"President Bush Signs CoburnCObama Transparency Act". Tom Coburn U.S. Senate Office. September 26, 2006. Archived from the original on May 1, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ "S. 3077: Strengthening Transparency and Accountability in Federal Spending Act of 2008: 2007C2008 (110th Congress)". Govtrack.us. June 3, 2008. Retrieved May 18, 2012.
Jump up ^ McIntire, Mike (February 3, 2008). "Nuclear Leaks and Response Tested Obama in Senate". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 9, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ Fisher, Daniel (August 11, 2008). "November Election A Lawyer's Delight". Forbes. Retrieved January 11, 2009.
Jump up ^ "NunnCLugar Report" (PDF). Richard Lugar U.S. Senate Office. August 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 1, 2008. Retrieved April 30, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Democratic Republic of the Congo". United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. April 2006. Archived from the original on January 8, 2011. Retrieved January 26, 2012."The IRC Welcomes New U.S. Law on Congo". International Rescue Committee. January 5, 2007. Archived from the original on August 7, 2011. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ Weixel, Nathaniel (November 15, 2007). "Feingold, Obama Go After Corporate Jet Travel". The Hill. Archived from the original on May 15, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2008.Weixel, Nathaniel (December 5, 2007). "Lawmakers Press FEC on Bundling Regulation". The Hill. Archived from the original on April 16, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2008. See also:"Federal Election Commission Announces Plans to Issue New Regulations to Implement the Honest Leadership and Open Government Act of 2007". Federal Election Commission. September 24, 2007. Archived from the original on April 11, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ Stern, Seth (January 31, 2007). "ObamaCSchumer Bill Proposal Would Criminalize Voter Intimidation". CQPolitics.com. Archived from the original on May 16, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2008.U.S. Senate, 110th Congress, 1st Session (January 31, 2007). "S. 453, Deceptive Practices and Voter Intimidation Prevention Act of 2007". Thomas. Retrieved April 27, 2008. See also:"Honesty in Elections" (editorial). The New York Times. January 31, 2007. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ Krystin, E. Kasak (February 7, 2007). "Obama Introduces Measure to Bring Troops Home". Medill News Service. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Obama, Bond Hail New Safeguards on Military Personality Disorder Discharges, Urge Further Action". Kit Bond U.S. Senate Office. October 1, 2007. Archived from the original on December 5, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Obama, Bond Applaud Senate Passage of Amendment to Expedite the Review of Personality Disorder Discharge Cases". March 14, 2008. Archived from the original on December 18, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Obama, Schiff Provision to Create Nuclear Threat Reduction Plan Approved" (Press release). Barack Obama U.S. Senate Office. December 20, 2007. Archived from the original on December 18, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Senate Passes Obama, McCaskill Legislation to Provide Safety Net for Families of Wounded Service Members". Barack Obama U.S. Senate Office. August 2, 2007. Archived from the original on December 18, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Committee Assignments". Barack Obama U.S. Senate Office. December 9, 2006. Archived from the original on December 9, 2006. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Obama Gets New Committee Assignments". Barack Obama U.S. Senate Office. Associated Press. November 15, 2006. Archived from the original on December 18, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ Baldwin, Tom (December 21, 2007). "Stay-At-Home Barack Obama Comes Under Fire for a Lack of Foreign Experience". Sunday Times (UK) (London). Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ Larson, Christina (September 2006). "Hoosier Daddy: What Rising Democratic Star Barack Obama Can Learn from an Old Lion of the GOP". Washington Monthly. Archived from the original on April 30, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Goudie, Chuck (January 12, 2006). "Obama Meets with Arafat's Successor". Chicago: WLS-TV. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
"Obama Slates Kenya for Fraud". Cape Town: News24. August 28, 2006. Archived from the original on June 5, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Wamalwa, Chris (September 2, 2006). "Envoy Hits at Obama Over Graft Remark". The Standard (Nairobi). Archived from the original on October 10, 2007. Retrieved April 27, 2008.
Moracha, Vincent; Mangoa Mosota (September 4, 2006). "Leaders Support Obama on Graft Claims". The Standard (Nairobi). Archived from the original on October 7, 2007.
^ Jump up to: a b Pearson, Rick; Long, Ray (February 10, 2007). "Obama: I'm running for president". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on August 13, 2007. Retrieved September 20, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Obama Launches Presidential Bid". BBC News. February 10, 2007. Archived from the original on February 2, 2008. Retrieved January 14, 2008.
Jump up ^ Parsons, Christi (February 10, 2007). "Obama's launch site: Symbolic Springfield: Announcement venue evokes Lincoln legacy". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved June 12, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Barack Obama on the Issues: What Would Be Your Top Three Overall Priorities If Elected?". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 9, 2008. Retrieved April 14, 2008. See also:
Thomas, Evan (2009). A Long Time Coming. New York: PublicAffairs. p. 74. ISBN 978-1-58648-607-5.
Falcone, Michael (December 21, 2007). "Obama's 'One Thing'". The New York Times. Retrieved April 14, 2008.
Jump up ^ "The Obama promise of hope and change". The Independent (London). November 1, 2008. Archived from the original on May 15, 2011.
Jump up ^ Tumulty, Karen (May 8, 2008). "The Five Mistakes Clinton Made". Time (New York). Archived from the original on December 11, 2008. Retrieved November 11, 2008.
Peter Baker; Jim Rutenberg (June 8, 2008). "The Long Road to a Clinton Exit". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 9, 2008. Retrieved November 29, 2008.
Jump up ^ Nagourney, Adam; Zeleny, Jeff (June 5, 2008). "Clinton to End Bid and Endorse Obama". The New York Times. Retrieved November 20, 2010.
Jump up ^ Nagourney, Adam; Zeleny, Jeff (August 23, 2008). "Obama Chooses Biden as Running Mate". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 1, 2009. Retrieved September 20, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Sources: High court selection process down to finalists". CNN. May 13, 2009.
Jump up ^ Baldwin, Tom (August 27, 2008). "Hillary Clinton: 'Barack is my candidate'". The Times (London). Retrieved August 27, 2008.(subscription required)
Nagourney, Adam (August 27, 2008). "Obama Wins Nomination as Biden and Bill Clinton Rally the Party". The New York Times. Retrieved August 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ Mara Liasson; Michele Norris (July 7, 2008). "Obama To Accept Nomination at Mile High Stadium". NPR. Retrieved December 22, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Obama accepts Democrat nomination". BBC News. August 29, 2008. Archived from the original on August 28, 2008. Retrieved August 29, 2008.
Marks, Alexandra (August 29, 2008). "Soaring speech from Obama, plus some specifics". The Christian Science Monitor (Boston MA). Archived from the original on March 14, 2010.
Jump up ^ Malone, Jim (July 2, 2007). "Obama Fundraising Suggests Close Race for Party Nomination". Voice of America. Archived from the original on September 14, 2007.
Cummings, Jeanne (September 26, 2007). "Small Donors Rewrite Fundraising Handbook". Politico. Archived from the original on February 1, 2008. Retrieved January 14, 2008.
Cadei, Emily (February 21, 2008). "Obama Outshines Other Candidates in January Fundraising". CQ Politics. Archived from the original on June 13, 2008.
Jump up ^ Salant, Jonathan D. (June 19, 2008). "Obama Won't Accept Public Money in Election Campaign". New York: Bloomberg. Retrieved June 19, 2008.[dead link]
Jump up ^ "Commission on Presidential Debates Announces Sites, Dates, Formats and Candidate Selection Criteria for 2008 General Election" (Press release). Commission on Presidential Debates. November 19, 2007. Archived from the original on July 6, 2008.
"Gun Ruling Reverberates". Hartford Courant. June 27, 2008. Archived from the original on July 5, 2008. Retrieved July 6, 2008.
Jump up ^ Johnson, Alex (November 4, 2008). "Barack Obama elected 44th president". MSNBC. Archived from the original on February 20, 2009. Retrieved February 20, 2009.
"CNN Electoral Map Calculator C Election Center 2008". CNN. 2008. Archived from the original on December 12, 2008. Retrieved December 14, 2008.
Jump up ^ "General Election: McCain vs. Obama". Real Clear Politics. Archived from the original on February 17, 2009. Retrieved February 20, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Obama wins historic US election". BBC News. November 5, 2008. Archived from the original on December 18, 2008. Retrieved November 5, 2008.
Nagourney, Adam (November 4, 2008). "Obama Elected President as Racial Barrier Falls". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 9, 2008. Retrieved November 5, 2008.
"Obama: 'This is your victory'". CNN. November 5, 2008. Archived from the original on November 4, 2008. Retrieved November 5, 2008.
Jump up ^ Johnson, Wesley (November 5, 2008). "Change has come, says President-elect Obama". The Independent (London). Archived from the original on December 9, 2008. Retrieved November 5, 2008.
Jump up ^ Shear, Michael D. (April 4, 2011). "Obama Begins Re-Election Facing New Political Challenges". The New York Times (blog). Archived from the original on April 5, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Obama announces re-election bid". United Press International. April 4, 2011. Archived from the original on May 10, 2011.
Jump up ^ Zeleny, Jeff & Calmes, Jackie (April 4, 2011). "Obama Opens 2012 Campaign, With Eye on Money and Independent Voters". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 15, 2012. Retrieved April 5, 2011.
Jump up ^ Yoon, Robert (April 3, 2012). "Leading presidential candidate to clinch nomination Tuesday". CNN (blog). Retrieved May 2, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Obama clinches Democratic nomination". CNN (blog). April 3, 2012. Retrieved April 3, 2012.
Jump up ^ Cohen, Tom (September 6, 2012). "Clinton says Obama offers a better path forward for America". CNN. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ Lauter, David (November 8, 2012). "Romney campaign gives up in Florida". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on November 9, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ Barnes, Robert (November 6, 2012). "Obama wins a second term as U.S. president". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ Welch, William M.; Strauss, Gary (November 7, 2012). "With win in critical battleground states, Obama wins second term". USA Today. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ FEC (July 2013). "Election Results for the U.S. President, the U.S. Senate and the U.S. House of Representatives" (PDF). Federal Elections Commission. p. 5. Retrieved August 20, 2013.
Jump up ^ Brownstein, Ronald (November 9, 2012). "The U.S. has reached a demographic milestone C and it's not turning back". National Journal. Archived from the original on November 11, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ Nichols, John (November 9, 2012). "Obama's 3 Million Vote, Electoral College Landslide, Majority of States Mandate". The Nation. Retrieved November 18, 2012.
Jump up ^ Lee, Kristen A. (November 7, 2012). "Election 2012: President Obama gives victory speech in front of thousands in Chicago, 'I have never been more hopeful about America'". Daily News (New York). Retrieved November 8, 2012.
^ Jump up to: a b Shear, Michael (January 21, 2013). "Obama Offers Liberal Vision: 'We Must Act'". The New York Times. Retrieved July 10, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Obama asks Pentagon for responsible Iraq drawdown". China Daily. January 23, 2009. Retrieved September 4, 2009.
Jump up ^ Glaberson, William (January 21, 2009). "Obama Orders Halt to Prosecutions at Guantnamo". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 16, 2009. Retrieved February 3, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Senate blocks transfer of Gitmo detainees", MSNBC, Associated Press, May 20, 2009, retrieved March 22, 2011
Jump up ^ Obama, Barack (December 15, 2009), "Presidential Memorandum C Closure of Detention Facilities at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base", White House, archived from the original on March 15, 2011, retrieved March 22, 2011
Jump up ^ Serbu, Jared (January 7, 2011), "Obama signs Defense authorization bill", Federal News Radio, retrieved March 22, 2011
Jump up ^ Northam, Jackie (January 23, 2013). "Obama's Promise To Close Guantanamo Prison Falls Short". NPR. Retrieved April 22, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Executive Order C Presidential Records". Archived from the original on January 22, 2009. Retrieved January 22, 2009.
Jump up ^ Obama, Barack (January 23, 2009). "Mexico City Policy and assistance for voluntary population planning (Presidential memorandum)". Washington, D.C.: The White House. Retrieved September 21, 2012.
Meckler, Laura (January 24, 2009). "Obama lifts 'gag rule' on family-planning groups". The Wall Street Journal. p. A3. Retrieved September 21, 2012.
Stein, Rob; Shear, Michael (January 24, 2009). "Funding restored to groups that perform abortions, other care". The Washington Post. p. A3. Retrieved September 21, 2012. Lifting the Mexico City Policy would not permit U.S. tax dollars to be used for abortions, but it would allow funding to resume to groups that provide other services, including counseling about abortions.
Jump up ^ "Obama Signs Equal-Pay Legislation". The New York Times. January 30, 2009. Retrieved June 15, 2009.
Jump up ^ Levey, Noam N. "Obama signs into law expansion of SCHIP health care program for children". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on April 30, 2009. Retrieved June 15, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Obama overturns Bush policy on stem cells". CNN. March 9, 2009. Archived from the original on March 30, 2010. Retrieved April 18, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Senate confirms Sotomayor for Supreme Court". CNN. August 6, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Obama nominates Sotomayor to Supreme Court". Retrieved September 13, 2014.
Jump up ^ Sherman, Mark (October 4, 2010). "New Era Begins on High Court: Kagan Takes Place as Third Woman". Associated Press. Retrieved November 13, 2010.
Jump up ^ Parsons, Christi (March 30, 2010). "Obama signs student loan reforms into law". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 19, 2010. Retrieved April 18, 2010.
Jump up ^ Branigin, William. "Obama signs higher-education measure into law". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 12, 2010.
Jump up ^ Robert Block, Robert; Mark K. Matthews (January 27, 2010). "White House won't fund NASA moon program". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 30, 2011. President Obama's budget proposal includes no money for the Ares I and Ares V rocket or Constellation program. Instead, NASA would be asked to monitor climate change and develop a new rocket
Jump up ^ Albanesius, Chloe (January 25, 2011). "Obama Pushes Innovation in Tech-Heavy State of the Union". PC Magazine. Retrieved May 17, 2011.
Jump up ^ Kornblut, Anne E.; Wilson, Scott (January 26, 2011). "State of the Union 2011: 'Win the future,' Obama says". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 18, 2011.
Jump up ^ "President Barack Obama signs hate crimes legislation into law". Bay Windows. October 28, 2009. Retrieved October 12, 2011.[dead link]
Jump up ^ "Obama signs hate crimes bill into law". CNN. October 28, 2009. Retrieved October 12, 2011.
Jump up ^ "'Don't ask, don't tell' repealed as Obama signs landmark law". The Guardian (London). December 22, 2010. Archived from the original on December 23, 2010. Retrieved December 22, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Obama to delay 'don't ask, don't tell' repeal". The Washington Times. November 21, 2008. Archived from the original on January 25, 2011. Retrieved December 22, 2010.
Jump up ^ Lee, Jesse. "The President Signs Repeal of "Don't Ask Don't Tell": "Out of Many, We Are One"". The White House. Archived from the original on December 25, 2010. Retrieved December 22, 2010.
Jump up ^ Baim, Tracy (January 14, 2009). "Windy City Times exclusive: Obama's Marriage Views Changed. WCT Examines His Step Back". Windy City Times. Retrieved May 10, 2012.
Jump up ^ Baim, Tracy (February 4, 2004). "Obama Seeks U.S. Senate seat". Windy City Times (Chicago). Retrieved May 10, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Obama backs same-sex marriage". CBS News. May 9, 2012. Retrieved May 9, 2012.
Jump up ^ Stein, Sam (May 9, 2012). "Obama Backs Gay Marriage". The Huffington Post (AOL Inc). Retrieved July 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ Robillard, Kevin (January 21, 2013). "First inaugural use of the word 'gay'". Politico. Retrieved January 21, 2013.
Jump up ^ Michelson, Noah (January 21, 2013). "Obama Inauguration Speech Makes History With Mention of Gay Rights Struggle, Stonewall Uprising". The Huffington Post. Retrieved January 21, 2013.
Jump up ^ Reilly, Ryan J. (February 28, 2013). "Obama Administration: Gay Marriage Ban Unconstitutional In Prop. 8 Supreme Court Case". The Huffington Post. Retrieved April 21, 2013.
Jump up ^ Mears, Bill (February 27, 2013). "Obama administration weighs in on defense of marriage law". CNN. Retrieved April 21, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Remarks by the President on the Supreme Court Decision on Marriage Equality". The White House. Retrieved October 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ Executive Order 13506, Washington, DC: President Barack Obama, The White House, March 11, 2009, Obama, B.. Retrieved January 27, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b "A renewed call to action to end rape and sexual assault". Retrieved September 13, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b "Memorandum: Establishing White House Task Force to Protect Students from Sexual Assault". Retrieved September 13, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Obama admin: Freedom from sexual assault a basic human right". MSNBC. Retrieved September 13, 2014.
Jump up ^ Rape and sexual assault: A renewed call to action, White House Council on Women and Girls, Washington, DC: White House Council on Women and Girls & Office of the Vice President, January 2014. Retrieved June 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Stimulus package en route to Obama's desk". CNN. February 14, 2009. Archived from the original on March 30, 2009. Retrieved March 29, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, Stimulus Watch". Retrieved April 9, 2011.
"Obama's remarks on signing the stimulus plan". CNN. February 17, 2009. Archived from the original on February 20, 2009. Retrieved February 17, 2009.
Jump up ^ Andrews, Edmund L.; Dash, Eric (March 23, 2009). "U.S. Expands Plan to Buy Banks' Troubled Assets". The New York Times. Retrieved April 12, 2010.
"Wall Street soars 7% on bank plan debut". Reuters. March 23, 2009.
Jump up ^ "White House questions viability of GM, Chrysler". The Huffington Post. March 30, 2009. Archived from the original on April 7, 2009.
Jump up ^ Bunkley, Nick; Vlasic, Bill (April 27, 2009). "Chrysler and Union Agree to Deal Before Federal Deadline". The New York Times. Retrieved April 12, 2010.
Jump up ^ Hughes, John; Salas, Caroline; Green, Jeff; Van Voris, Bob (June 1, 2009). "GM Begins Bankruptcy Process With Filing for Affiliate". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on June 13, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ Conkey, Christopher; Radnofsky, Louise (June 9, 2009). "Obama Presses Cabinet to Speed Stimulus Spending". The Wall Street Journal (News Corp). Retrieved July 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ Dana Hedgpeth (August 21, 2009). "U.S. Says 'Cash for Clunkers' Program Will End on Monday". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 26, 2010.
Jump up ^ Joseph R. Szczesny (August 26, 2009). "Was Cash for Clunkers a Success?". Time. Retrieved March 26, 2010.
Jump up ^ Mian, Atif R.; Sufi, Amir (September 1, 2010). "The Effects of Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from the 2009 'Cash for Clunkers' Program". doi:10.2139/ssrn.1670759. SSRN 1670759.
Jump up ^ Goldman, David (April 6, 2009). "CNNMoney.com's bailout tracker". Bailout tracker 06: 20. Retrieved March 26, 2010.
Jump up ^ Montgomery, Lori (July 24, 2010). "Federal budget deficit to exceed $1.4 trillion in 2010 and 2011". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 29, 2010.
Jump up ^ Bull, Alister; Mason, Jeff (February 1, 2010). "Obama's 2010 budget: deficit soars amid job spending". Reuters. Retrieved July 29, 2010.
Jump up ^ Dickson, David M. (March 26, 2010). "CBO report: Debt will rise to 90% of GDP". The Washington Times. Associated Press. Retrieved July 29, 2010.
Jump up ^ Sahadi, Jeanne (February 12, 2014). "Where's the debt ceiling now?". CNN. Retrieved March 21, 2014.
Jump up ^ NBC's Sylvie Stein. "First Read C A breakdown of the debt-limit legislation". MSNBC. Archived from the original on January 14, 2012. Retrieved August 3, 2011.
Jump up ^ "House passes debt ceiling bill". MSNBC. March 8, 2011. Retrieved August 3, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Unemployment Rate". Bureau of Labor Statistics. Retrieved October 6, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Unemployment Rate". Bureau of Labor Statistics. Retrieved October 6, 2012.
Jump up ^ Theodossiou, Eleni; Hipple, Steven F. (2011). "Unemployment Remains High in 2010" (PDF). Monthly Labor Review (Bureau of Labor Statistics) 134 (3): 3C22. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 8, 2011. Retrieved April 7, 2011.
Jump up ^ Eddlemon, John P. (2011). "Payroll Employment Turns the Corner in 2010" (PDF). Monthly Labor Review (Bureau of Labor Statistics) 134 (3): 23C32. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 6, 2011. Retrieved April 7, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Unemployment Rate". Bureau of Labor Statistics. Retrieved December 11, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Unemployment Rate". Bureau of Labor Statistics. Retrieved January 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Unemployment Rate". Bureau of Labor Statistics. Retrieved June 6, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b "Percent Change in Real Gross Domestic Product (Quarterly)". National Income and Product Accounts Table. Bureau of Economic Analysis. Archived from the original on May 12, 2011. Retrieved April 7, 2011.
Jump up ^ Harding, Robin (July 28, 2010). "Beige Book survey reports signs of slowdown". Financial Times. Archived from the original on July 29, 2010. Retrieved July 29, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Percent Change in Real Gross Domestic Product (Annual)". National Income and Product Accounts Table. Bureau of Economic Analysis. Archived from the original on May 12, 2011. Retrieved April 7, 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b "Estimated Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act on Employment and Economic Output". Congressional Budget Office. Retrieved February 21, 2012.
^ Jump up to: a b Calmes, Jackie; Cooper, Michael (November 20, 2009). "New Consensus Sees Stimulus Package as Worthy Step". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 11, 2011. Retrieved December 21, 2010.
Jump up ^ "CBO: Stimulus created as many as 2.1 million jobs". February 23, 2010. Retrieved April 25, 2010.
Jump up ^ Krugman, Paul (November 2, 2009). "Too Little of a Good Thing". The New York Times. Retrieved December 22, 2010.
Jump up ^ Isidore, Chris (January 29, 2010). "Best economic growth in six years". CNN. Retrieved April 18, 2010.
Jump up ^ "New NABE Survey Shows Business Recovery Gaining Momentum, with More Jobs Ahead". Archived from the original on May 2, 2010. Retrieved April 26, 2010.
Jump up ^ Politics that Work, "U.S. GDP Growth Relative to Original NATO Members", Politics that Work, March 9, 2015
Jump up ^ Irene Chapple, "OECD: U.S. will recover faster, Europe faces unemployment crisis", CNN, May 29, 2013
Jump up ^ Herszenhorn, David M.; Stolberg, Sheryl Gay (December 7, 2010). "Democrats Skeptical of Obama on New Tax Plan". The New York Times.
Jump up ^ "Obama signs tax deal into law". CNN. December 17, 2010. Retrieved December 17, 2010.
Jump up ^ Kuhnhenn, Jim (December 5, 2013). "Obama: Income Inequality a Defining Challenge". Associated Press. Retrieved January 9, 2014.
Jump up ^ Broder, John M. (October 1, 2009). "E.P.A. Moves to Curtail Greenhouse Gas Emissions". The New York Times.
Jump up ^ "US moves to limit industrial greenhouse gas emissions". Google News. Agence France-Presse. October 1, 2009. Archived from the original on May 23, 2012. Retrieved April 18, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Obama Halts Drilling Projects, Defends Actions". NPR. May 27, 2010.
Jump up ^ Jonsson, Patrik (May 29, 2010). "Gulf oil spill: Obama's big political test". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on June 1, 2010. Retrieved June 6, 2010.
Jump up ^ Goldenberg, Suzanne (July 28, 2013). "Barack Obama expresses reservations about Keystone XL pipeline project". The Guardian (London).
Jump up ^ Stein, Sam (June 25, 2013). Obama: Keystone XL Should Not Be Approved If It Will Increase Greenhouse Gas Emissions. The Huffington Post (US).
Jump up ^ Goldenberg, Suzanne (January 18, 2013)."Shell's plans in Arctic at risk as Obama advisers call for halt to oil exploration". The Guardian (London).
Jump up ^ "Obama Vetoes Keystone XL Pipeline Bill". NPR. February 24, 2015. Retrieved February 24, 2015.
Jump up ^ Barron-Lopez, Laura (March 4, 2015). "Keystone veto override fails". The Hill. Capitol Hill Publishing. Retrieved July 2, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Sweet, Lynn (July 22, 2009). "Obama July 22, 2009 press conference. Transcript". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on April 16, 2015. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ Stolberg, Sheryl Gay; Zeleny, Jeff (September 9, 2009). "Obama, Armed With Details, Says Health Plan Is Necessary". The New York Times. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ Allen, Mike (September 9, 2009). "Barack Obama will hedge on public option". Politico. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Obama calls for Congress to face health care challenge". CNN. September 9, 2009. Archived from the original on September 10, 2009. Retrieved September 9, 2009.
Jump up ^ Daniel Nasaw. "Stem cell". The Guardian. Retrieved September 13, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Health Insurance Premium Credits in the PPACA" (PDF). Congressional Research Service. Retrieved May 17, 2015.
Jump up ^ Hulse, Carl; Robert Pear (November 7, 2009). "Sweeping Health Care Plan Passes House". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 31, 2011. Retrieved November 8, 2009.
Jump up ^ Herszenhorn, David M.; Jackie Calmes (December 7, 2009). "Abortion Was at Heart of Wrangling". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 31, 2011. Retrieved December 6, 2009.
Jump up ^ Hensley, Scott (December 24, 2009). "Senate Says Yes To Landmark Health Bill". NPR. Archived from the original on January 21, 2010. Retrieved December 24, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Health Care Reform, at Last". The New York Times. March 21, 2010. Archived from the original on March 26, 2010. Retrieved March 22, 2010.
Jump up ^ Gay Stolberg, Sheryl (March 23, 2010). "Obama Signs Landmark Health Care Bill". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 25, 2010. Retrieved March 23, 2010.
Jump up ^ Rice, Sabriya (March 25, 2010). "5 key things to remember about health care reform". CNN. Retrieved January 6, 2013.
^ Jump up to: a b "Policies to Improve Affordability and Accountability". The White House. Retrieved January 6, 2013.
Jump up ^ Grier, Peter (March 20, 2010). "Health Care Reform Bill 101". The Christian Science Monitor (Boston). Retrieved July 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ Elmendorf, Douglas W. (November 30, 2009). "An Analysis of Health Insurance Premiums Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" (PDF). Congressional Budget Office. Retrieved April 9, 2012.
Jump up ^ Grier, Peter (March 21, 2010). "Health care reform bill 101: Who will pay for reform?". The Christian Science Monitor. Boston. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
Jump up ^ Grier, Peter (March 19, 2010). "Health care reform bill 101: Who must buy insurance?". The Christian Science Monitor (Boston). Archived from the original on April 5, 2010. Retrieved April 7, 2010.
Jump up ^ Elmendorf, Douglas W. "H.R. 4872, Reconciliation Act of 2010 (Final Health Care Legislation)". Congressional Budget Office. Retrieved January 6, 2013.
Jump up ^ Barnes, Robert (June 28, 2012). "Supreme Court upholds Obama health care overhaul by 5C4 vote, approving insurance requirement". The Washington Post. Associated Press. Retrieved June 29, 2012.
Jump up ^ Kimberly Leonard. "Supreme Court Upholds Obamacare Subsidies". US News & World Report. Retrieved November 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ Rebecca Droke, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, June 17, 2014, "Obama speaks in Pittsburgh about tech, jobs."
Jump up ^ Obama domestic energy policy. Bloomberg News. June 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Manufacturing Balks at Obama's U.S. Energy Policy: Video". Bloomberg News. June 17, 2014. Retrieved July 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Mardell, Mark (January 16, 2013). "US gun debate: Obama unveils gun control proposals". London: BBC News. Retrieved January 16, 2013.
Jump up ^ "What's in Obama's Gun Control Proposal". The New York Times. January 16, 2013. Retrieved February 12, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Obama announces gun control executive action (full transcript)" "CNN". January 5, 2016. January 7, 2016.
Jump up ^ Obama, Barack. "Barack Obama: Guns Are Our Shared Responsibility" The New York Times. January 7, 2016. January 7, 2016.
Jump up ^ Paul Harris in Oakland and Ewen MacAskill in Washington (November 3, 2010). "US midterm election results herald new political era as Republicans take House". The Guardian (London). Archived from the original on December 14, 2010. Retrieved December 22, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Obama calls midterm elections a 'shellacking' for Democrats". The Christian Science Monitor. November 4, 2010. Archived from the original on November 24, 2010. Retrieved December 22, 2010.
Jump up ^ "See Obama's first paragraph of his transcript". All Things Considered. NPR. November 3, 2010. Retrieved December 22, 2010.
Jump up ^ Wyatt, Edward (November 10, 2014). "Obama Asks F.C.C. to Adopt Tough Net Neutrality Rules". The New York Times. Retrieved November 15, 2014.
Jump up ^ NYT Editorial Board (November 14, 2014). "Why the F.C.C. Should Heed President Obama on Internet Regulation". The New York Times. Retrieved November 15, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Cybersecurity C Executive Order 13636" (Press release). Retrieved April 30, 2015.
Jump up ^ Colvin, Ross; Barkin, Noah (February 7, 2009). "Biden vows break with Bush era foreign policy". Toronto: Canada.com. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2013.
Ghattas, Kim (March 8, 2009). "Clinton's gaffes and gains on tour". BBC News. Retrieved June 15, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Obama reaches out to Muslim world on TV". MSNBC. January 27, 2009. Retrieved June 15, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Barack Obama's address to Iran: Full text of Barack Obama's videotaped message to the people and leaders of Iran as they celebrate their New Year's holiday, Nowruz". The Guardian (London). March 20, 2013. Retrieved July 14, 2013.
Jump up ^ DeYoung, Karen (April 9, 2009). "Nation U.S. to Join Talks on Iran's Nuclear Program". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 15, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Obama speech draws praise in Mideast". The Guardian (London). January 23, 2008. Retrieved June 15, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Obama in Egypt reaches out to Muslim world". CNN. June 4, 2009. Retrieved January 30, 2011.
Jump up ^ Weber, Joseph; Dinan, Stephen (June 26, 2009). "Obama dismisses Ahmadinejad apology request". The Washington Times. Retrieved July 2, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Obama: No green light for Israel to attack Iran". CNN. July 7, 2009. Retrieved January 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ Rajghatta, Chidanand (September 24, 2009). "Barack 'No Bomb' Obama pushes for world without nukes". The Times of India. Retrieved July 2, 2015.[dead link]
Jump up ^ Berger, Robert (March 25, 2010). "Israel Refuses to Halt Construction in East Jerusalem". Voice of America. Retrieved July 2, 2015.
Jump up ^ Kershner, Isabel (March 24, 2010). "Israel Confirms New Building in East Jerusalem". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 29, 2010. Retrieved April 26, 2010.
Jump up ^ Baker, Peter (March 26, 2010)."Obama Seals Arms Control Deal With Russia". The New York Times.
Jump up ^ Baker, Peter (December 22, 2010). "Senate Passes Arms Control Treaty With Russia, 71C26". The New York Times.
Jump up ^ McVeigh, Karen (December 6, 2011). "Gay rights must be criterion for US aid allocations, instructs Obama". The Guardian (London). Retrieved January 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ Parsons, Christi (August 7, 2013). "Obama criticizes Russia's new anti-gay law in Leno interview". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 27, 2014.
Jump up ^ Johnson, Luke (August 9, 2013). "Obama Opposes Olympic Boycott, Criticizes Russian Anti-Gay Law". The Huffington Post. Retrieved August 27, 2014.
Jump up ^ Achenbach, Joel (December 18, 2014). "In Miami, a mixed and muted response to historic change in Cuba policy". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 18, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Saudi Arabia launces air attacks in Yemen". The Washington Post. March 25, 2015.
Jump up ^ Feller, Ben (February 27, 2009). "Obama sets firm withdrawal timetable for Iraq". The Detroit News. Associated Press. Retrieved March 3, 2009.[dead link]
Jump up ^ Jones, Athena (February 27, 2009). "Obama announces Iraq plan". MSNBC. Retrieved July 2, 2015.
Jump up ^ Sykes, Hugh (August 19, 2010). "Last US combat brigade exits Iraq". BBC News. Retrieved December 25, 2012.
Jump up ^ MacAskill, Ewen (September 1, 2010). "Barack Obama ends the war in Iraq. 'Now it's time to turn the page'". The Guardian (London).
Jump up ^ "All U.S. troops out of Iraq by end of year". MSNBC. October 21, 2011. Retrieved December 25, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Obama Is Sending 275 US Troops To Iraq". BusinessInsider.com. Retrieved June 19, 2014.
Jump up ^ Nebehay, Stephanie. "New U.N. rights boss warns of 'house of blood' in Iraq, Syria". Retrieved July 11, 2015.
Jump up ^ "DoD Authorizes War on Terror Award for Inherent Resolve Ops". Defense.gov. October 31, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Islamic State: Coalition 'pledges more troops' for Iraq". BBC News. Retrieved August 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ Aaron Mehta (January 19, 2015). "A-10 Performing 11 Percent of Anti-ISIS Sorties". Defense News. Retrieved August 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ "1,000 soldiers from the 82nd Airborne headed to Iraq". Stars and Stripes. Retrieved August 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Stealthy Jet Ensures Other War-Fighting Aircraft Survive". US News & World Report. Retrieved August 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Obama Calls for U.S. Military to Renew Focus on Afghanistan". NewsHour with Jim Lehrer (PBS). July 15, 2008. Archived from the original on March 27, 2010. Retrieved April 18, 2010.
Jump up ^ Hodge, Amanda (February 19, 2009). "Obama launches Afghanistan Surge". The Australian (Sydney).
Jump up ^ "Top U.S. Commander in Afghanistan Is Fired". The Washington Post. May 12, 2009.
"New U.S. Commander Brings Counterinsurgency Experience to Afghanistan". Fox News Channel. May 13, 2009.
Jump up ^ Associated Press. (December 1, 2009). "Obama details Afghan war plan, troop increases" MSNBC.
Jump up ^ "Gates says he agrees with Obama decision on McChrystal". CNN. June 24, 2010. Retrieved September 18, 2010.
Jump up ^ Chandrasekaran, Rajiv (February 12, 2013). "Obama wants to cut troop level in Afghanistan in half over next year". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 14, 2013.
Jump up ^ Marcus, Jonathan (October 15, 2015). "US troops in Afghanistan: Taliban resurgence sees rethink". BBC News. Retrieved October 15, 2015.
Jump up ^ "United States vetoes Security Council resolution on Israeli settlements". UN News Service Section. February 18, 2011. Retrieved September 13, 2014.
Jump up ^ Levy, Elior (May 22, 2011). "PA challenges Netanyahu to accept 1967 lines." Ynetnews. Retrieved May 22, 2011.
Jump up ^ Johnston, Nicholas (June 20, 2012). "Obama Says U.S. Connection With Israel Is 'Unbreakable.'". Bloomberg. Retrieved October 26, 2012.
Jump up ^ Levinson, Charles (August 14, 2010)."U.S., Israel Build Military Cooperation". The Wall Street Journal (New York). Retrieved March 1, 2011.
Jump up ^ Kampeas, Ron (October 26, 2012). "For Obama campaign, trying to put to rest persistent questions about 'kishkes.'" Jewish Journal.
Jump up ^ Goldberg, Jeffrey (January 14, 2013). "Obama: 'Israel Doesn't Know What Its Best Interests Are'". Bloomberg (New York). Retrieved January 23, 2013.
Jump up ^ Goldberg, Jeffrey. "After the Iran Deal: Obama, Netanyahu, and the Future of the Jewish State." The Atlantic. September 13, 2015. September 13, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Floor Statement by Senator McCain Introducing the Senate Resolution Calling for a No-Fly Zone in Libya". Senate.gov. March 14, 2011. Retrieved March 28, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Senate Passes Resolution Calling for No-Fly Zone Over Libya". National Journal. March 1, 2011. Archived from the original on May 11, 2011.
Jump up ^ Winnett, Robert (March 17, 2011). "Libya: UN approves no-fly zone as British troops prepare for action". The Daily Telegraph (London). Archived from the original on April 28, 2011.
Jump up ^ Shackle, Samira (March 18, 2011). "Libya declares ceasefire". New Statesman blog (London). Retrieved July 16, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Obama: US to Transfer Lead Role in Libya". RTT Newswire. Retrieved March 22, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Obama says US efforts in Libya have saved lives, control of operation can be turned over soon". Ventura County Star (Camarillo, CA). Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 28, 2011. Retrieved March 22, 2011.
Jump up ^ Pannell, Ian (March 21, 2011). "Gaddafi 'not targeted' by allied strikes". BBC News. Archived from the original on June 23, 2011. Retrieved July 3, 2011.
Jump up ^ Jones, Sam (March 22, 2011). "F-15 fighter jet crashes in Libya". The Guardian (London). Archived from the original on March 22, 2011. Retrieved March 23, 2011.
Jump up ^ "NATO No-Fly Zone over Libya Operation UNIFIED PROTECTOR" (PDF). NATO. March 25, 2011.
Jump up ^ Montopoli, Brian (March 22, 2011). "Is Obama's Libya offensive constitutional?". CBS News. Retrieved March 22, 2011.
Jump up ^ Stein, Sam (March 21, 2011). "Obama's Libya Policy Makes Strange Bedfellows of Congressional Critics". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on March 23, 2011. Retrieved March 26, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Obama juggles Libya promises, realities". CNN. March 25, 2011. Retrieved March 26, 2011.
Jump up ^ Scott Wilson and Joby Warrick. "Assad must go, Obama says". Retrieved February 19, 2016.
Jump up ^ Nelson, Colleen. "Obama Says Syrian Leader Bashar al-Assad Must Go". Retrieved June 3, 2016.
Jump up ^ Hosenball, Mark. "Obama authorizes secret support for Syrian rebels". Retrieved February 19, 2016.
Jump up ^ Michael D. Shear; Helene Cooper; Eric Schmitt. "Obama Administration Ends Effort to Train Syrians to Combat ISIS". Retrieved February 20, 2016.
Jump up ^ Phil Stewart and Kate Holton. "U.S. pulls plug on Syria rebel training effort; will focus on weapons supply". Retrieved February 20, 2016.
Jump up ^ Gordon, Michael. "U.S. and Russia Reach Deal to Destroy Syria's Chemical Arms". Retrieved February 19, 2016.
Jump up ^ Boghani, Priyanka. "Syria Got Rid of Its Chemical Weapons C But Reports of Attacks Continue". Retrieved February 19, 2016.
Jump up ^ "Obama outlines plan to target IS fighters". Al Jazeera. September 11, 2014. Retrieved September 24, 2014.
Jump up ^ Gregory Korte. "16 times Obama said there would be no boots on the ground in Syria". Retrieved February 19, 2016.
^ Jump up to: a b c Mazzetti, Mark; Helene Cooper; Peter Baker (May 3, 2011). "Clues Gradually Led to the Location of Osama bin Laden". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 3, 2011. Retrieved May 4, 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b Rucker, Philip; Wilson, Scott; Kornblut, Anne E. (May 2, 2011). "Osama bin Laden is killed by U.S. forces in Pakistan". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 13, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Official offers details of bin Laden raid". Newsday. May 2, 2011. Retrieved September 13, 2014.
Jump up ^ Schabner, Dean; Karen Travers (May 1, 2011). "Osama bin Laden Killed by U.S. Forces in Pakistan". ABC News. Archived from the original on May 4, 2011. Retrieved May 3, 2011.
Jump up ^ Baker, Peter; Helene Cooper; Mark Mazzetti (May 2, 2011). "Bin Laden Is Dead, Obama Says". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 5, 2011. Retrieved May 3, 2011.
Jump up ^ Walsh, Declan; Richard Adams; Ewen MacAskill (May 2, 2011). "Osama bin Laden is dead, Obama announces". The Guardian (London). Archived from the original on May 3, 2011. Retrieved May 3, 2011.
Jump up ^ Dorning, Mike (May 2, 2011). "Death of Bin Laden May Strengthen Obama's Hand in Domestic, Foreign Policy". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on May 3, 2011. Retrieved May 4, 2011.
Jump up ^ "World Reaction To Osama Bin Laden's Death". NPR. May 2, 2011. Archived from the original on May 3, 2011. Retrieved May 4, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Iran deal reached, Obama hails step toward 'more hopeful world'". July 14, 2015. Retrieved July 14, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Iran, World Powers Prepare to Sign Nuclear Accord". July 14, 2015. Retrieved July 14, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Landmark deal reached on Iran nuclear program". July 14, 2015. Retrieved July 14, 2015.
Jump up ^ Warren, Strobel. "Secret talks in Canada, Vatican City led to Cuba breakthrough". Reuters. Retrieved December 21, 2014.
Jump up ^ Morello, Carol; DeYoung, Karen. "Secret U.S.-Cuba diplomacy ended in landmark deal on prisoners, future ties". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 21, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Nelson Mandela's memorial service". Daily Mail. December 10, 2013. Retrieved December 11, 2013.
Jump up ^ Nadeau, Barbie Latza (December 17, 2014). "The Pope's Diplomatic Miracle: Ending the U.S.CCuba Cold War". The Daily Beast. Retrieved December 18, 2014.
Jump up ^ The New Republic, The Cuban Thaw Is Obama's Finest Foreign Policy Achievement to Date, by Joel Gillin, April 13, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Obama announces re-establishment of U.S.-Cuba diplomatic ties". CNN. Retrieved July 1, 2015.
Jump up ^ Whitefield, Mimi (July 20, 2015). "United States and Cuba reestablish diplomatic relations". The Miami Herald. Retrieved July 19, 2015.
Jump up ^ Julie Hirschfeld Davis and Damien Cave (March 21, 2016). "Obama Arrives in Cuba, Heralding New Era After Decades of Hostility". The New York Times. p. A1.
Jump up ^ Lee, Carol E. "Obama Becomes First U.S. President to Address African Union". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved July 29, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Remarks by President Obama to the People of Africa". The White House. Retrieved July 29, 2015.
Jump up ^ Ferris, Sarah. "Obama: Proud to be first U.S. president to visit Kenya". The Hill. Retrieved July 30, 2015.
Jump up ^ "President Obama visits Hiroshima". BBC News. Retrieved June 19, 2016.
Jump up ^ Wallace-Wells, Benjamin (November 2004). "The Great Black Hope: What's Riding on Barack Obama?". Washington Monthly. Archived from the original on May 13, 2008. Retrieved April 7, 2008. See also:Scott, Janny (December 28, 2007). "A Member of a New Generation, Obama Walks a Fine Line". International Herald Tribune. Archived from the original on January 17, 2008. Retrieved April 7, 2008.
Jump up ^ Payne, Les (August 19, 2007). "In One Country, a Dual Audience" (paid archive). Newsday (New York). Retrieved April 7, 2008.
Jump up ^ Dorning, Mike (October 4, 2007). "Obama Reaches Across Decades to JFK" (paid archive). Chicago Tribune. Retrieved April 7, 2008. See also:Harnden, Toby (October 15, 2007). "Barack Obama is JFK Heir, Says Kennedy Aide". The Daily Telegraph (London). Archived from the original on May 15, 2008. Retrieved April 7, 2008.
Jump up ^ Holmes, Stephanie (November 30, 2008). "Obama: Oratory and originality". The Age (Melbourne). Archived from the original on December 18, 2008. Retrieved December 11, 2008.
Gallo, Carmine (March 3, 2008). "How to Inspire People Like Obama Does". Bloomberg BusinessWeek (New York). Archived from the original on February 26, 2009. Retrieved February 21, 2009.
Zlomislic, Diana (December 11, 2008). "New emotion dubbed 'elevation'". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on December 12, 2008. Retrieved December 11, 2008.
Greene, Richard (January 25, 2011). "Obama Is America's Third Greatest Presidential Orator in Modern Era". The Huffington Post. Retrieved July 2, 2011.
Jump up ^ "YouTube C ChangeDotGov's Channel". YouTube. Archived from the original on February 20, 2010. Retrieved April 18, 2010.
Jump up ^ Dyson, Michael Eric. (2016). The Black Presidency: Barack Obama and the Politics of Race in America. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 275. ISBN 978-0-544-38766-9.
Jump up ^ Compton, Matt (January 30, 2012). "President Obama Hangs Out With America". The White House Blog. White House. Retrieved January 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Obama Starts With 68% Job Approval". Gallup.com. January 24, 2009. Archived from the original on June 16, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Obama hits low point in Gallup Poll C 41%". USA Today. April 15, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ Jon Terbush (December 9, 2010). "Approval By Numbers: How Obama Compares To Past Presidents". Tpmdc.talkingpointsmemo.com. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ Oliphant, James (May 11, 2011). "Bin Laden bounce? New poll shows jump in Obama approval". Los Angeles Times. Tribune Publishing. Retrieved June 7, 2011.
Jump up ^ Balz, Dan; Cohen, John (June 6, 2011). "Obama loses bin Laden bounce; Romney on the move among GOP contenders". The Washington Post. Nash Holdings LLC. Retrieved June 7, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Presidential Job Approval Center". Gallup.com. Retrieved June 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Gallup Daily: Obama Job Approval". Gallup Polling. January 22, 2015. Retrieved March 23, 2015.
Jump up ^ "World wants Obama as president: poll". ABC News. Reuters. September 9, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Obama to visit nuclear, biological weapons destruction facilities in former Soviet Union". Obama.senate.gov. August 24, 2005. Archived from the original on December 18, 2008. Retrieved October 12, 2011.
Jump up ^ Scherer, Steve (September 12, 2007). "Rome Mayor's Leadership Bid May Lead to Early Italian Elections". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on May 29, 2010. Retrieved May 21, 2011.
Jump up ^ Pedder, Sophie (February 20, 2008). "Sarkozy, Obama and McCain". The Economist. Archived from the original on January 31, 2012. Retrieved November 20, 2008.
Jump up ^ Freed, John C. (February 6, 2009). "Poll shows Obama atop list of most respected". The New York Times. Retrieved January 22, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Obama Most Popular Leader, Poll Finds". The New York Times. May 29, 2009. Retrieved January 22, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Obama remains a popular symbol of hope". France 24. June 2, 2009. Archived from the original on May 13, 2011. Retrieved January 22, 2012.
Jump up ^ Goodman, Dean (February 10, 2008). "Obama or Clinton? Grammys go for Obama". Reuters. Archived from the original on December 19, 2008. Retrieved November 24, 2008.
Jump up ^ Strange, Hannah (March 5, 2008). "Celebrities join YouTube revolution". The Times (London). Retrieved December 18, 2008. (subscription required)
Jump up ^ Wappler, Margaret (June 20, 2008). "Emmys give knuckle bump to will.i.am; more videos on the way". Los Angeles Times blogs. Archived from the original on May 16, 2011. Retrieved January 26, 2012.
Jump up ^ Scherer, Michael (December 19, 2012). "2012 Person of the Year: Barack Obama, the President". Time. Retrieved December 19, 2012.
Jump up ^ Von Drehle, David (December 16, 2008). "Why History Can't Wait". Time. Archived from the original on December 17, 2008. Retrieved December 17, 2008.
Jump up ^ Barack Obama (May 25, 2011). "Full transcript | 25 May 2011". New Statesman. Retrieved June 14, 2014.
Jump up ^ "20th century to the present day C UK Parliament". Parliament of the United Kingdom. April 21, 2010. Retrieved June 14, 2014.
Jump up ^ "The Nobel Peace Prize 2009". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on October 10, 2009. Retrieved October 9, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Obama: 'Peace requires responsibility'". CNN. December 10, 2009. Retrieved May 21, 2011.
Jump up ^ Philp, Catherine (October 10, 2009). "Barack Obama's peace prize starts a fight". The Times (London). Retrieved October 10, 2009.(subscription required)
Jump up ^ Samuelsohn, Darren (October 9, 2009). "Obama Wins Nobel Prize in Part for Confronting 'Great Climatic Challenges'". The New York Times. Greenwire. Archived from the original on April 15, 2010. Retrieved April 18, 2010.
Jump up ^ Sharon Otterman (October 9, 2009). "World Reaction to a Nobel Surprise". The New York Times. Retrieved October 9, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Obama Peace Prize win has Americans asking why?". Reuters. October 9, 2009. Retrieved October 9, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Obama: Nobel Peace Prize 'a call to action' C Politics C White House". MSNBC. Retrieved September 13, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Obama is surprise winner of Nobel Peace Prize". Reuters. October 9, 2009. Retrieved October 9, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Remarks by the President on Winning the Nobel Peace Prize". Retrieved September 13, 2014.
Jump up ^ Steven Erlanger (October 10, 2009). "Surprise Nobel for Obama Stirs Praise and Doubts". The New York Times. Retrieved May 20, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Obama's win unique among presidents". CNN. October 9, 2009.
Jump up ^ Taylor, Adam. "Obama's Nobel peace prize didn't have the desired effect, former Nobel official reveals". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 4, 2016.
Jump up ^ "Keeping Hope Alive: Barack Obama Puts Family First". The Oprah Winfrey Show. October 18, 2006. Retrieved June 24, 2008.
Jump up ^ Fornek, Scott (September 9, 2007). "Half Siblings: 'A Complicated Family'". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on January 18, 2010. Retrieved June 24, 2008. See also:"Interactive Family Tree". Chicago Sun-Times. September 9, 2007. Archived from the original on July 3, 2008. Retrieved June 24, 2008.
Jump up ^ Fornek, Scott (September 9, 2007). "Madelyn Payne Dunham: 'A Trailblazer'". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on May 14, 2009. Retrieved June 24, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Obama's grandmother dies after battle with cancer". CNN. November 3, 2008. Archived from the original on November 3, 2008. Retrieved November 4, 2008.
Jump up ^ Smolenyak, Megan (May 9, 2011). "Tracing Barack Obama's Roots to Moneygall". The Huffington Post.
Jump up ^ Obama (1995, 2004), p. 13. For reports on Obama's maternal genealogy, including slave owners, Irish connections, and common ancestors with George W. Bush, Dick Cheney, and Harry S. Truman, see: Nitkin, David; Harry Merritt (March 2, 2007). "A New Twist to an Intriguing Family History". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved June 24, 2008.Jordan, Mary (May 13, 2007). "Tiny Irish Village Is Latest Place to Claim Obama as Its Own". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 24, 2008."Obama's Family Tree Has a Few Surprises". CBS 2 (Chicago). Associated Press. September 8, 2007. Archived from the original on June 2, 2008. Retrieved June 24, 2008.
Jump up ^ Zimmer, Benjamin (2009). "Obama's Indonesian Redux". Language Log. Archived from the original on March 3, 2009. Retrieved March 12, 2009.
Obama: Saya Kangen Nasi Goreng, Bakso, dan Rambutan
Jump up ^ Zimmer, Benjamin (January 23, 2009). "Obama's Indonesian pleasantries: the video". Language Log. University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved October 7, 2012.
Jump up ^ Kantor, Jodi (June 1, 2007). "One Place Where Obama Goes Elbow to Elbow". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 1, 2009. Retrieved April 28, 2008. See also: "The Love of the Game" (video). Real Sports with Bryant Gumbel (HBO). April 15, 2008. Retrieved October 12, 2011.
Jump up ^ Stolberg, Sheryl Gay; Kirkpatrick, David D.; Shane, Scott (January 22, 2009). "On First Day, Obama Quickly Sets a New Tone". The New York Times. p. 1. Retrieved September 7, 2012.
Jump up ^ Silva, Mark (August 25, 2008). "Barack Obama: White Sox 'serious' ball". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on August 29, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Barack Obama Explains White Sox Jacket, Talks Nats in All-Star Booth Visit". MLB Fanhouse. July 14, 2009. Retrieved December 6, 2009.
Jump up ^ Branigin, William (January 30, 2009). "Steelers Win Obama's Approval". The Washington Post. But other than the Bears, the Steelers are probably the team that's closest to my heart.
Jump up ^ Mayer, Larry (October 7, 2011). "1985 Bears honored by President Obama". Chicago Bears. Retrieved November 4, 2012.
Jump up ^ Obama (2006), pp. 327C332. See also:Brown, Sarah (December 7, 2005). "Obama '85 masters balancing act". The Daily Princetonian. Archived from the original on February 20, 2009. Retrieved February 9, 2009.
Jump up ^ Obama (2006), p. 329.
Jump up ^ Fornek, Scott (October 3, 2007). "Michelle Obama: 'He Swept Me Off My Feet'". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on January 18, 2010. Retrieved April 28, 2008.
Jump up ^ Martin, Jonathan (July 4, 2008). "Born on the 4th of July". Politico. Archived from the original on July 10, 2008. Retrieved July 10, 2008.
Jump up ^ Obama (1995, 2004), p. 440, and Obama (2006), pp. 339C340. See also:"Election 2008 Information Center: Barack Obama". Gannett News Service. Retrieved April 28, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Obamas choose private Sidwell Friends School". International Herald Tribune. November 22, 2008. Archived from the original on January 29, 2009. Retrieved July 2, 2015.
Jump up ^ Cooper, Helene (April 13, 2009). "One Obama Search Ends With a Puppy Named Bo". The New York Times. Retrieved December 22, 2010.
Jump up ^ Feldmann, Linda (August 20, 2013). "New little girl arrives at White House. Meet Sunny Obama. (+video)". The Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved August 20, 2013.
Jump up ^ Zeleny, Jeff (December 24, 2005). "The first time around: Sen. Obama's freshman year". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on March 13, 2011. Retrieved April 28, 2008.
Jump up ^ Slevin, Peter (December 17, 2006). "Obama says he regrets land deal with fundraiser". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 10, 2008.
Robinson, Mike (June 4, 2008). "Rezko found guilty in corruption case". MSNBC. Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 7, 2008. Retrieved June 24, 2008.
Jump up ^ Harris, Marlys (December 7, 2007). "Obama's Money". CNNMoney.com. Archived from the original on April 24, 2008. Retrieved April 28, 2008.
See also:Goldfarb, Zachary A (March 24, 2007). "Measuring Wealth of the '08 Candidates". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 28, 2008.
Jump up ^ Zeleny, Jeff (April 17, 2008). "Book Sales Lifted Obamas' Income in 2007 to a Total of $4.2 Million". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 16, 2009. Retrieved April 28, 2008.
Jump up ^ Shear, Michael D.; Hilzenrath, David S. (April 16, 2010). "Obamas report $5.5 million in income on 2009 tax return". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 22, 2010.
Jump up ^ Solman, Paul (April 18, 2011). "How Much Did President Obama Make in 2010?". PBS NewsHour. Archived from the original on May 2, 2011. Retrieved January 27, 2012.
Jump up ^ Solman, Paul (April 27, 2011). "The Obamas Gave $131,000 to Fisher House Foundation in 2010; What Is It?". PBS NewsHour. Archived from the original on January 29, 2014. Retrieved January 27, 2012.
Jump up ^ Wolf, Richard (May 16, 2012). "Obama worth as much as $10 million". USA Today. Retrieved June 16, 2012.
Jump up ^ Elsner, Alan (December 7, 2008). Obama says he won't be smoking in White House". Reuters. Retrieved February 28, 2010.
Jump up ^ Zengerle, Patricia (February 8, 2011). "Yes, he did: first lady says Obama quit smoking". Reuters. Retrieved May 9, 2011.
Jump up ^ * "American President: Barack Obama". Charlottesville, VA: Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia. 2009. Archived from the original on January 23, 2009. Retrieved January 23, 2009. Religion: Christian
"The Truth about Barack's Faith" (PDF). Obama for America. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 5, 2011. Retrieved July 1, 2012.
Miller, Lisa (July 18, 2008). "Finding his faith". Newsweek. Archived from the original on February 6, 2010. Retrieved February 4, 2010. He is now a Christian, having been baptized in the early 1990s at Trinity United Church of Christ in Chicago.
Barakat, Matthew (November 17, 2008). "Obama's church choice likely to be scrutinized; D.C. churches have started extending invitations to Obama and his family". MSNBC. Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 24, 2009. Retrieved January 20, 2009. The United Church of Christ, the denomination from which Obama resigned when he left Wright's church, issued a written invitation to join a UCC denomination in Washington and resume his connections to the church.
"Barack Obama, long time UCC member, inaugurated forty-fourth U.S. President". United Church of Christ. January 20, 2009. Archived from the original on January 25, 2009. Retrieved January 21, 2009. Barack Obama, who spent more than 20 years as a UCC member, is the forty-fourth President of the United States.
Sullivan, Amy (June 29, 2009). "The Obama's find a church home C away from home". Time (New York). Retrieved February 5, 2010. instead of joining a congregation in Washington, D.C., he will follow in George W. Bush's footsteps and make his primary place of worship Evergreen Chapel, the nondenominational church at Camp David.
Kornblut, Anne E. (February 4, 2010). "Obama's spirituality is largely private, but it's influential, advisers say". The Washington Post. p. A6. Retrieved February 5, 2010. Obama prays privately... And when he takes his family to Camp David on the weekends, a Navy chaplain ministers to them, with the daughters attending a form of Sunday school there.
Jump up ^ Obama (2006), pp. 202C208. Portions excerpted in: Obama, Barack (October 16, 2006). "My Spiritual Journey". Time (New York). Archived from the original on April 30, 2008. Retrieved April 28, 2008.
Obama, Barack (June 28, 2006). "'Call to Renewal' Keynote Address". Barack Obama: U.S. Senator for Illinois. Archived from the original on January 4, 2009. Retrieved June 16, 2008.
Jump up ^ Pulliam, Sarah; Olsen, Ted (January 23, 2008). "Q&A: Barack Obama". Christianity Today (Carol Stream, IL). Retrieved January 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ Charles Babington; Darlene Superville (September 28, 2010). "Obama 'Christian By Choice': President Responds To Questioner". The Huffington Post. Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 11, 2011.
Jump up ^ Video C "President Obama: 'I am a Christian By Choice'". ABC News blog. September 29, 2010.
Jump up ^ Garrett, Major; Obama, Barack (March 14, 2008). "Obama talks to Major Garrett on 'Hannity & Colmes'". RealClearPolitics. Retrieved November 10, 2012. Major Garrett, Fox News correspondent: So the first question, how long have you been a member in good standing of that church? Sen. Barack Obama (D-IL), presidential candidate: You know, I've been a member since 1991 or '92. And C but I have known Trinity even before then when I was a community organizer on the South Side, helping steel workers find jobs...Garrett: As a member in good standing, were you a regular attendee of Sunday services? Obama: You know, I won't say that I was a perfect attendee. I was regular in spurts, because there was times when, for example, our child had just been born, our first child. And so we didn't go as regularly then.
"Obama strongly denounces former pastor". MSNBC. Associated Press. April 29, 2008. Retrieved November 10, 2012. I have been a member of Trinity United Church of Christ since 1992, and have known Reverend Wright for 20 years," Obama said. "The person I saw yesterday was not the person that I met 20 years ago.
Miller, Lisa (July 11, 2008). "Finding his faith". Newsweek (New York). Archived from the original on July 20, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2012. He is now a Christian, having been baptized in the early 1990s at Trinity United Church of Christ in Chicago.
Remnick, David (2010). The Bridge: The Life and Rise of Barack Obama. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. p. 177. ISBN 978-1-4000-4360-6. In late October 1987, his third year as an organizer, Obama went with Kellman to a conference on the black church and social justice at the Harvard Divinity School.
Maraniss (2012), p. 557: It would take time for Obama to join and become fully engaged in Wright's church, a place where he would be baptized and married; that would not happen until later, during his second time around in Chicago, but the process started then, in October 1987...Jerry Kellman: "He wasn't a member of the church during those first three years, but he was drawn to Jeremiah."
Jump up ^ "Obama's church choice likely to be scrutinized". MSNBC. Associated Press. November 17, 2008. Retrieved January 20, 2009.
Jump up ^ Sullivan, Amy (June 29, 2009). "The Obamas find a church home C away from home". Time. Retrieved December 14, 2009.
References
Jacobs, Sally H. (2011). The Other Barack: The Bold and Reckless Life of President Obama's Father. New York: PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1-58648-793-5.
Maraniss, David (2012). Barack Obama: The Story. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4391-6040-4.
Mendell, David (2007). Obama: From Promise to Power. New York: Amistad/HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-085820-9.
Obama, Barack (2004) [1st. Pub. 1995]. Dreams from My Father: A Story of Race and Inheritance. New York: Three Rivers Press. ISBN 978-1-4000-8277-3.
Obama, Barack (2006). The Audacity of Hope: Thoughts on Reclaiming the American Dream. New York: Crown Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-307-23769-9.
Scott, Janny (2011). A Singular Woman: The Untold Story of Barack Obama's Mother. New York: Riverhead Books. ISBN 978-1-59448-797-2.
Further reading
Graff, Garrett M. (November 1, 2006). "The Legend of Barack Obama". Washingtonian. Archived from the original on February 14, 2008. Retrieved January 14, 2008.
Koltun, Dave (2005). "The 2004 Illinois Senate Race: Obama Wins Open Seat and Becomes National Political "Star"". In Ahuja, Sunil; Dewhirst, Robert. The Road to Congress 2004. Hauppauge, New York: Nova Science Publishers. ISBN 978-1-59454-360-9.
Lizza, Ryan (September 2007). "Above the Fray". GQ. Retrieved October 27, 2010.
MacFarquhar, Larissa (May 7, 2007). "The Conciliator: Where is Barack Obama Coming From?". The New Yorker. Retrieved January 14, 2008.
McClelland, Edward (2010). Young Mr. Obama: Chicago and the Making of a Black President. New York: Bloomsbury Press. ISBN 978-1-60819-060-7.
Zutter, Hank De (December 8, 1995). "What Makes Obama Run?". Chicago Reader. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
External links
	Wikinews has news related to:
Barack Obama
Listen to this article (info/dl)
MENU0:00


This audio file was created from a revision of the "Barack Obama" article dated 2012-04-24, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles
Library resources about
Barack Obama
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
By Barack Obama
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Official

Official website of President Barack Obama (White House)
Official website of The Obama Foundation
Official website of Organizing for Action
Other

Obama B. United States Health Care Reform: Progress to Date and Next Steps. JAMA. Published online July 11, 2016. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.9797.
Barack Obama at DMOZ
Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Profile at Project Vote Smart
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Appearances on C-SPAN
Barack Obama articles in the archive of the Chicago Tribune
Collected news and commentary at the Tampa Bay Times's PolitiFact.com
Collected news and commentary at The Washington Post's Fact Checker blog
Works by Barack Obama at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Barack Obama at Internet Archive
[show] v t e
Barack Obama
[show] 
Offices and distinctions
[show] 
Links to related articles
Books
View or order collections of articles	
	Barack Obama
Portals
Access related topics	
	Barack Obama portal
	Government of the United States portal
Find out more on Wikipedia's
Sister projects	
	Media
from Commons
	News stories
from Wikinews
	Quotations
from Wikiquote
	Source texts
from Wikisource
	Data
from Wikidata
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 52010985 LCCN: n94112934 ISNI: 0000 0001 2133 1026 GND: 132522136 SELIBR: 314463 SUDOC: 118177257 BNF: cb15591663c (data) MusicBrainz: 0de4d19f-05c8-4562-a3c0-7abdc144f1d5 NLA: 44067442 NDL: 01112565 NCL: 1208890 NKC: js20070608010 ICCU: IT\ICCU\UMCV\307371 US Congress: O000167 BNE: XX4663545 CiNii: DA1624368X
Categories: Barack ObamaObama family1961 births20th-century American writers20th-century scholars21st-century American politicians21st-century American writers21st-century scholarsAfrican-American academicsAfrican-American ChristiansAfrican-American lawyersAfrican-American non-fiction writersAfrican-American politiciansAfrican-American United States presidential candidatesAfrican-American United States SenatorsAmerican book publishers (people)American civil rights lawyersAmerican community activistsAmerican expatriates in IndonesiaAmerican gun control advocatesAmerican legal scholarsAmerican male writersAmerican memoiristsAmerican Nobel laureatesAmerican people of English descentAmerican people of Irish descentAmerican people of Kenyan descentAmerican people of Luo descentAmerican political writersAmerican ProtestantsColumbia University alumniCritics of IslamophobiaDemocratic Party Presidents of the United StatesDemocratic Party (United States) presidential nomineesDemocratic Party United States SenatorsGrammy Award winnersHarvard Law School alumniIllinois DemocratsIllinois lawyersIllinois State SenatorsInternational opponents of apartheid in South AfricaIrish diaspora politiciansLiving peopleNobel Peace Prize laureatesOccidental College alumniPoliticians from Chicago, IllinoisPoliticians from Honolulu, HawaiiPoliticians of Luo descentPresidents of the United StatesProgressivism in the United StatesPunahou School alumniRecipients of the Presidential Medal of Distinction of IsraelUnited States presidential candidates, 2008United States presidential candidates, 2012United States Senators from IllinoisUniversity of Chicago Law School facultyWriters from Chicago, Illinois
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikisource
Languages
Ach
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
????
?nglisc
??
???????
Aragons
?????
???????
Asturianu
Ava?e'?

Aymar aru
Az?rbaycanca
??????
Bamanankan
?????
Bahasa Banjar
Ban-lam-g
Basa Banyumasan
?

 (?)?
???????
Bikol Central
Bislama

Boarisch
???????
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Catal
?
Cebuano
?e?tina
Chavacano de Zamboanga
Chi-Chewa
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deitsch
Deutsch
??????????
Din bizaad
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
?
Emilin e rumagnl

Espa?ol
Esperanto
Estreme?u
Euskara
?????
Fiji Hindi
F?royskt
Fran?ais
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gidhlig
Galego
MZ
????????????
Z/Hak-ka-ng?
???
Hausa
Hawai?i
???????
??????
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Igbo
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
??????/inuktitut

IsiZulu
slenska
Italiano
?????
Basa Jawa
Kalaallisut
?????
Kapampangan
???????
????? / ?????
??
Kernowek
Kinyarwanda
Kiswahili
Kreyl ayisyen
Kurd?

Ladino
???
Latga?u
Latina
Latvie?u
L?tzebuergesch
Lietuvi?
Ligure
Limburgs
Lingla
La .lojban.
Lumbaart
Magyar

Malagasy
??????
Malti
Mori
?????
?????????
????
????????
Bahasa Melayu
Mng-d??ng-ng??

??????????
Nhuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
Nedersaksies
??????
????? ????
Z
Napulitano

Nordfriisk
Norfuk / Pitkern
Norsk bokm?l
Norsk nynorsk
Nouormand
Occitan
 
?????
O?zbekcha/?
??????
Pangasinan
??????
Papiamentu
????
?????????
Piemontis
Tok Pisin
Plattdtsch
Polski
Portugus
Qaraqalpaqsha
Q?r?mtatarca
Reo tahiti
Ripoarisch
Roman?
Rumantsch
Runa Simi


 
Smegiella
?????????
Sardu
Scots
Sesotho sa Leboa
Shqip
Sicilianu
?????
Simple English
????
Sloven?ina
Sloven??ina
?l?nski
Soomaaliga
?????? ???????
Sranantongo
 / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / 
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
?????
Taqbaylit
Tarandne
/tatar?a
??????
Tetun
???
??
???
Tsetshestahese
Trk?e
Trkmen?e
?
????
???????? / Uyghurche
Vneto
Veps?n kel
Ti?ng Vi?t
Volapk
Walon
West-Vlams
Winaray

??????
Yorb
Z
Zazaki
Zeuws
?emait??ka

??????
Edit links
This page was last modified on 29 July 2016, at 02:01.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
Miscegenation
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

[hide]This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article may be too long to read and navigate comfortably. (October 2015)
This article's lead section may not adequately summarize key points of its contents. (May 2015)
Race
Classification
Genetics and differences
Race and genetics
Human genetic variation
Society
Historical concepts
Race
in Brazil
in the United States
Racial inequality in the United States
Racial wage gap in the United States
Racial profiling
Racism
in the United States
Scientific racism
Race and...
Crime in the United Kingdom
Crime in the United States
Incarceration
in the United States
Race and health
in the United States
Intelligence
History of the race
and intelligence controversy
Sports
Related topics
Ethnic group
Eugenics
Genetics
Human evolution
Index
Category
v t e
Miscegenation (/m??s?d???ne???n/; from the Latin miscere "to mix" + genus "kind") is the mixing of different racial groups through marriage, cohabitation, sexual relations, or procreation.[1] Because of the term's historical use in contexts that typically implied disapproval, more unambiguously neutral terms such as interracial, interethnic or cross-cultural are more common in contemporary usage.

The term miscegenation has been used since the 19th century to refer to interracial marriage and interracial sexual relations,[1] and more generally to the process of genetic admixture. Historically, the term has been used in the context of laws banning interracial marriage and sex, known as anti-miscegenation laws.[2] The Latin term entered historical records during European colonialism and the Age of Discovery, but societies such as China and Japan also had restrictions on marrying with people whom they considered to be of a different race.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Usage
2	Etymological history
3	The concept of miscegenation
4	Laws banning miscegenation
5	History of ethnoracial admixture and attitudes towards miscegenation
5.1	Africa
5.1.1	Mauritius
5.1.2	Runion
5.1.3	Madagascar
5.2	Americas
5.2.1	United States
5.2.1.1	Hawaii
5.2.2	Latin America
5.2.2.1	Peru
5.2.2.2	Cuba
5.2.2.3	Costa Rica
5.2.2.4	British West Indies
5.2.2.5	Mexico
5.2.2.6	Argentina
5.2.2.7	Guatemala
5.2.2.8	El Salvador
5.2.2.9	Bolivia
5.2.2.10	Jamaica and Haiti
5.3	Asia
5.3.1	China
5.3.2	Taiwan
5.3.3	Hong Kong
5.3.4	Macao
5.3.5	Indian subcontinent
5.3.6	Japan
5.3.7	Korea
5.3.8	Vietnam
5.3.9	Malaysia and Singapore
5.3.10	Burma
5.3.11	Philippines
5.4	Europe
5.4.1	Germany
5.4.2	Hungary
5.4.3	Iberian Peninsula
5.4.4	Italian Peninsula
5.4.5	Russia
5.4.6	Southeastern and Eastern Europe
5.4.7	Turkey
5.4.8	United Kingdom
5.5	Middle East
5.5.1	Israel
5.6	Oceania
5.6.1	Australia
5.6.2	New Zealand
5.7	Portuguese colonies
6	Demographics of ethnoracial admixture
6.1	U.S.
6.2	Brazil
7	Genetic admixture
7.1	Admixture in the United States
7.2	Admixture in Latin America
7.2.1	Background
7.2.2	Recent studies
7.3	Admixture in the Philippines
7.4	Admixture among the Romani people
8	See also
9	Notes and references
10	Bibliography
11	Other sources
12	External links
Usage[edit]
In the present day, the word miscegenation is avoided by many scholars, because the term suggests a concrete biological phenomenon, rather than a categorization imposed on certain relationships. The term's historical use in contexts that typically implied disapproval is also a reason why more unambiguously neutral terms such as interracial, interethnic or cross-cultural are more common in contemporary usage.[3] The term remains in use among scholars when referring to past practices concerning multiraciality, such as anti-miscegenation laws that banned interracial marriages.[4]

In Spanish, Portuguese and French, the words used to describe the mixing of races are mestizaje, mesti?agem and mtissage. These words, much older than the term miscegenation, are derived from the Late Latin mixticius for "mixed", which is also the root of the Spanish word mestizo. Portuguese also uses miscigena??o, derived from the same Latin root as the English word. These non-English terms for "race-mixing" are not considered as offensive as "miscegenation", although they have historically been tied to the caste system (Casta) that was established during the colonial era in Spanish-speaking Latin America. Some groups in South America, however, consider the use of the word mestizo offensive because it was used during the times of the colony to refer specifically to the mixing between the conquistadores and the indigenous people.

Today, the mixes among races and ethnicities are diverse, so it is considered preferable to use the term "mixed-race" or simply "mixed" (mezcla). In Portuguese-speaking Latin America (i.e., Brazil), a milder form of caste system existed, although it also provided for legal and social discrimination among individuals belonging to different races, since slavery for blacks existed until the late 19th century. Intermarriage occurred significantly from the very first settlements, with their descendants achieving high rank in government and society.[citation needed] To this day, there are controversies if Brazilian class system would be drawn mostly around socio-economic lines, not racial ones (in a manner similar to other former Portuguese colonies). Conversely, people classified in censuses as black, brow ("pardo") or indigenous have disadvantaged social indicators in comparison to the white population.[5][6]

The concept of miscegenation is tied to concepts of racial difference. As the different connotations and etymologies of miscegenation and mestizaje suggest, definitions of race, "race mixing" and multiraciality have diverged globally as well as historically, depending on changing social circumstances and cultural perceptions. Mestizo are people of mixed white and indigenous, usually Amerindian ancestry, who do not self-identify as indigenous peoples or Native Americans. In Canada, however, the Mtis, who also have partly Amerindian and partly white, often French-Canadian, ancestry, have identified as an ethnic group and are a constitutionally recognized aboriginal people.

The differences between related terms and words which encompass aspects of racial admixture show the impact of different historical and cultural factors leading to changing social interpretations of race and ethnicity. Thus the Comte de Montlosier, in exile during the French Revolution, equated class difference in 18th-century France with racial difference. Borrowing Boulainvilliers' discourse on the "Nordic race" as being the French aristocracy that invaded the plebeian "Gauls", he showed his contempt for the lowest social class, the Third Estate, calling it "this new people born of slaves ... mixture of all races and of all times".[citation needed]

Etymological history[edit]
Miscegenation comes from the Latin miscere, "to mix" and genus, "kind". The word was coined in the U.S. in 1863, and the etymology of the word is tied up with political conflicts during the American Civil War over the abolition of slavery and over the racial segregation of African-Americans. The reference to genus was made to emphasize the supposedly distinct biological differences between whites and non-whites, though all humans belong to the same genus, Homo, and the same species, Homo sapiens.

The word was coined in an anonymous propaganda pamphlet published in New York City in December 1863, during the American Civil War. The pamphlet was entitled Miscegenation: The Theory of the Blending of the Races, Applied to the American White Man and Negro.[7] It purported to advocate the intermarriage of whites and blacks until they were indistinguishably mixed, as a desirable goal, and further asserted that this was the goal of the Republican Party. The pamphlet was a hoax, concocted by Democrats, to discredit the Republicans by imputing to them what were then radical views that offended against the attitudes of the vast majority of whites, including those who opposed slavery. There was already much opposition to the war effort.

The pamphlet and variations on it were reprinted widely in both the north and south by Democrats and Confederates. Only in November 1864 was the pamphlet exposed as a hoax. The hoax pamphlet was written by David Goodman Croly, managing editor of the New York World, a Democratic Party paper, and George Wakeman, a World reporter.

By then, the word miscegenation had entered the common language of the day as a popular buzzword in political and social discourse. The issue of miscegenation, raised by the opponents of Abraham Lincoln, featured prominently in the election campaign of 1864.

In the United States, miscegenation has referred primarily to the intermarriage between whites and non-whites, especially blacks.

Before the publication of Miscegenation, the word amalgamation, borrowed from metallurgy, had been in use as a general term for ethnic and racial intermixing. A contemporary usage of this metaphor was that of Ralph Waldo Emerson's private vision in 1845 of America as an ethnic and racial smelting-pot, a variation on the concept of the melting pot. Opinions in the U.S on the desirability of such intermixing, including that between white Protestants and Irish Catholic immigrants, were divided. The term miscegenation was coined to refer specifically to the intermarriage of blacks and whites, with the intent of galvanising opposition to the war.[8]

The concept of miscegenation[edit]
Franz Boas (considered to be the father of American cultural anthropology) as well as many of his students, such as Ashley Montagu, considered race to be an invalid concept.[9] From this point of view, if the concept of race is invalid, then miscegenation as the crossing of races is equally invalid. In this view there is only one racethat of human; all differences in various people(s) are superficial. These ideas are pursued in greater depth in Ashley Montagu's books on the subject.[10][11]

Laws banning miscegenation[edit]
Sex and the law
Scale of justice 2.svg
Social issues
Age of consent Antisexualism Censorship Circumcision Deviant sexual intercourse Ethics Homophobia Intersex Miscegenation (interracial relations) Norms Objectification Pornography Public morality Red-light district Reproductive rights Same-sex marriage Survival sex
Specific offences
(May vary according to jurisdiction)
Adultery Bestiality Buggery Child grooming Child pornography Child prostitution Criminal transmission of HIV Female genital mutilation Fornication Incest Pimping Prostitution forced Public indecency Rape statutory marital Seduction Sexting Sexual abuse child Sexual assault Sexual harassment Slavery Sodomy UK Section 63 (2008) Violence Voyeurism
Sex offender registration
Sex offender registry Sex offender registries in the United States
Portals
Sexuality Criminal justice Law
v t e
Main article: Anti-miscegenation laws
Laws banning "race-mixing" were enforced in certain U.S. states from 1691[12] until 1967 (though still on the books in some states until 2000),[13] in Nazi Germany (the Nuremberg Laws) from 1935 until 1945, and in South Africa during the early part of the Apartheid era (1949C1985). All these laws primarily banned marriage between persons of different racially or ethnically defined groups, which was termed "amalgamation" or "miscegenation" in the U.S. The laws in Nazi Germany and laws in many U.S. states, as well as laws in South Africa, also banned sexual relations between such individuals.

In the United States, various state laws prohibited marriages between whites and blacks, and in many states they also prohibited marriages between whites and Native Americans or Asians.[14] In the U.S., such laws were known as anti-miscegenation laws. From 1913 until 1948, 30 out of the then 48 states enforced such laws.[15] Although an "Anti-Miscegenation Amendment" to the United States Constitution was proposed in 1871, in 1912C1913, and in 1928,[16][17] no nationwide law against racially mixed marriages was ever enacted. In 1967, the United States Supreme Court unanimously ruled in Loving v. Virginia that anti-miscegenation laws are unconstitutional. With this ruling, these laws were no longer in effect in the remaining 16 states that still had them.

The Nazi ban on interracial sexual relations and marriages was enacted in September 1935 as part of the Nuremberg Laws, the Gesetz zum Schutze des deutschen Blutes und der deutschen Ehre (The Law for the Protection of German Blood and German Honour). The Nuremberg Laws classified Jews as a race, and forbade extramarital sexual relations and marriage between persons classified as "Aryan" and "non-Aryan". Violation of this was condemned as Rassenschande (lit. "race-disgrace") and could be punished by imprisonment (usually followed by deportation to a concentration camp) and even by death.

The Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act in South Africa, enacted in 1949, banned intermarriage between different racial groups, including between whites and non-whites. The Immorality Act, enacted in 1950, also made it a criminal offense for a white person to have any sexual relations with a person of a different race. Both laws were repealed in 1985.

History of ethnoracial admixture and attitudes towards miscegenation[edit]
Africa[edit]

Jean Ping the Deputy Prime Minister of Gabon who has a Chinese father and a black Gabonese mother was elected as Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union on 1 February 2008.

Jerry John Rawlings, the ex-President of Ghana is the son of a Scottish father and a black Ghanaian mother.
Africa has a long history of interracial mixing with male Arab and European explorers, traders and soldiers having sexual relations with black African women as well as taking them as wives. Arabs played a big role in the African slave trade and unlike the trans-atlantic slave trade most of the black African slaves in the Arab slave trade were women. Most of them were used as sexual slaves by the Arab men and some were even taken as wives.[18]

Sir Richard Francis Burton writes during his expedition to Africa about relationships between black women and white men. He writes, "The women are well disposed toward strangers of fair complexion, apparently with the permission of their husbands." There are several mulatto populations throughout Africa mostly the results of interracial relationships between Arab and European men and black women. In South Africa there are big mulatto communities like the Coloureds and Griqua formed by White colonists taking native African wives. In Namibia there is a community called the Rehoboth Basters formed by the interracial marriage of Dutch/German men and black African women.

In the former Portuguese Africa (now known as Angola, Mozambique and Cape Verde) racial mixing between white Portuguese and black Africans was fairly common, especially in Cape Verde where the majority of the population is of mixed descent.

There have been some recorded cases of Chinese merchants and labourers taking African wives throughout Africa as many Chinese workers were employed to build railways and other infrastructural projects in Africa. These labour groups were made up completely of men with very few Chinese women coming to Africa.

In West Africa, especially Nigeria there are many cases of Lebanese men taking African women. Many of their offsprings have gained prominent positions in Africa. Flight Lieutenant Jerry John Rawlings, who has a Scottish father and a black Ghanaian mother became the President and Head of State of Ghana. Jean Ping, the son of a Chinese trader and a black Gabonese mother, became the Deputy Prime Minister as well as the Foreign minister of Gabon and was the Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union from 2009 to 2012. Current President of Botswana, Ian Khama, is the son of Botswana's first president, Seretse Khama and a white (British) woman, Ruth Williams.

Indian men, who have long been traders in East Africa, at times married among local African women. The British Empire brought many Indian workers into East Africa to build the Uganda Railway. Indians eventually populated South Africa, Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Malawi, Rwanda, Zambia, Zimbabwe and Zaire in small numbers. These interracial unions were mostly unilateral marriages between Indian men and East African women.[19]

Mauritius[edit]
In the late 19th to early 20th century, Chinese men in Mauritius married Indian women due to both a lack of Chinese women and the higher numbers of Indian women on the island.[20][21] At first the prospect of relations with Indian women was unappealing to the original all male Chinese migrants yet they eventually had to establish sexual unions with Indian women since there were no Chinese women arriving in the country,[22] a similar situation happened in Guyana, where the prospect of sexual relations with Indian women was at first unappealing to the mostly male Chinese migrants although there was a lack of Chinese women, but eventually their attitude changed and Indian women and Chinese men established sexual relationships with each other.[23] The 1921 census in Mauritius counted that Indian women there had a total of 148 children fathered by Chinese men.[24][25][26] These Chinese were mostly traders.[27]

Runion[edit]
The majority of the population of Runion is defined as mixed race. In the last 350 years, various ethnic groups (Africans, Chinese, English, French, Gujarati Indians, Tamil Indians) have arrived and settled on the island. There have been mixed race people on the island since its first permanent inhabitation in 1665.

Madagascar[edit]
There was frequent intermixing between the Austronesian and Bantu-speaking populations of Madagascar. A large number of the Malagasy today are the result of admixture between Austronesians and Africans. This is most evident in the Mikea, who are also the last known Malagasy population to still practice a hunter-gatherer lifestyle. Additional information is that most of the African admixture is patrilineal while most of the Austronesian admixture is matrilineal. This means that the majority of the intermixing were between black African males and Austronesian females.[28][29]

Intermarriage between Chinese men and native Malagasy women was not uncommon.[30] Several thousand Cantonese men intermarried and cohabited with Malagasy women. 98% of the Chinese traced their origin from Guangdongmore specifically, the Cantonese district of Shunde. For example, the 1954 census found 1,111 "irregular" Chinese-Malagasy unions and 125 legitimate, i.e., legally married. Children were registered by their mothers under a Malagasy name.[clarification needed] Intermarriage between French men and Native Malagasy women was not uncommon either.

Americas[edit]
United States[edit]
See also: Race in the United States, Multiracial American, and Anti-miscegenation laws in the United States

US President Barack Obama is the son of a white American mother and a black Kenyan father.
Historically, "race mixing" between black and white people was taboo in the United States. So-called anti-miscegenation laws, barring blacks and whites from marrying or having sex, were established in colonial America as early as 1691.[12] The 1691 Virginia law was amended in 1705 to remove "Indian-white" from the prohibition. Thomas Jefferson's policy proposal for dealing with Native Americans was "to let our settlements and theirs meet and blend together, to intermix, and become one people."[31]

The historical taboo among American whites surrounding white-black can be seen as a historical consequence of the oppression and racial segregation of African-Americans.[32][33] In many U.S. states interracial marriage was already illegal when the term miscegenation was invented in 1863. The first laws banning interracial marriage were introduced in the late 17th century in the slave-holding colonies of Virginia (1691) and Maryland (1692). Later these laws also spread to colonies and states where slavery did not exist.

It has also been argued[by whom?] that the first laws banning interracial marriage were a response by the planter elite to the problems they were facing due to the socio-economic dynamics of the plantation system in the Southern colonies. The bans in Virginia and Maryland were established at a time when slavery was not yet fully institutionalized. At the time, most forced laborers on the plantations were indentured servants, and they were mostly white. Some historians have suggested that the at-the-time unprecedented laws banning interracial marriage were originally invented by planters as a divide and rule tactic after the uprising of servants in Bacon's Rebellion. According to this theory, the ban on interracial marriage was issued to split up the racially mixed, increasingly mixed-race labour force into whites, who were given their freedom, and blacks, who were later treated as slaves rather than as indentured servants. By forbidding interracial marriage, it became possible to keep these two new groups separated and prevent a new rebellion.[34]


U.S States, by the date of repeal of anti-miscegenation laws:
  No laws passed
  Before 1887
  1948 to 1967
  12 June 1967
In 1918, there was considerable controversy in Arizona when an Asian Indian farmer B. K. Singh married the sixteen-year-old daughter of one of his white tenants.[35] During and after slavery, most American whites regarded interracial marriage between whites and blacks as taboo. However, during slavery many white American men and women did conceive children with black partners. These children automatically became slaves if the mother was a slave or were born free if the mother was free, as slavery was matrilineal.[citation needed] Some children were freed by their slave-holding fathers or bought to be emancipated if the father was not the owner. Many children of these unions formed enclaves under names such as Colored and Gens de couleur, etc.[citation needed] Most mixed-raced descendants merged into the African-American ethnic group during Jim Crow.

Genetic research suggests that a considerable minority of white Americans (estimated at 1/3 of the population by some geneticists such as Mark Shriver) has some distant African ancestry,[citation needed] and that the majority of black Americans have some European ancestry.[citation needed] After the Civil War and the abolition of slavery in 1865, the marriage of white and black Americans continued to be taboo, especially but not only in the former slave states.

The Motion Picture Production Code of 1930, also known as Hays Code, explicitly stated that the depiction of "miscegenation... is forbidden."[citation needed] One important strategy intended to discourage the marriage of white Americans and Americans of partly African descent was the promulgation of the one-drop theory, which held that any person with any known African ancestry, however remote, must be regarded as "black." This definition of blackness was encoded in the anti-miscegenation laws of various U.S. states, such as Virginia's Racial Integrity Act of 1924. The plaintiffs in Loving v. Virginia, Mildred Jeter and Richard Loving became the historically most prominent interracial couple in the US through their legal struggle against this act.


Robert De Niro and his wife Grace Hightower. Census data showed 117,000 black wife-white husband couples in 2006.[36]
Throughout American history, there has been frequent mixing between Native Americans and black Africans. When Native Americans invaded the European colony of Jamestown, Virginia in 1622, they killed the Europeans but took the African slaves as captives, gradually integrating them. Interracial relationships occurred between African Americans and members of other tribes along coastal states. During the transitional period of Africans becoming the primary race enslaved, Native Americans were sometimes enslaved with them. Africans and Native Americans worked together, some even intermarried and had mixed children. The relationship between Africans and Native-Americans was seen as a threat to Europeans and European-Americans, who actively tried to divide Native-Americans and Africans and put them against each other.[37]

During the 18th Century, some Native American women turned to freed or runaway African men due to a major decline in the male population in Native American villages. At the same time, the early slave population in America was disproportionately male. Records show that some Native American women bought African men as slaves. Unknown to European sellers, the women freed and married the men into their tribe. Some African men chose Native American women as their partners because their children would be free, as the child's status followed that of the mother. The men could marry into some of the matrilineal tribes and be accepted, as their children were still considered to belong to the mother's people. As European expansion increased in the Southeast, African and Native American marriages became more numerous.[38]

From the mid 19th to 20th centuries, many black people and ethnic Mexicans intermarried with each other in the Lower Rio Grande Valley in South Texas (mostly in Cameron County and Hidalgo County). In Cameron County, 38% of black people were interracially married (7/18 families) while in Hidalgo County the number was 72% (18/25 families). These two counties had the highest rates of interracial marriages involving at least one black spouse in the United States. The vast majority of these marriages involved black men marrying ethnic Mexican women or first generation Tejanas (Texas-born women of Mexican descent). Since ethnic Mexicans were considered white by Texas officials and the U.S. government, such marriages were a violation of the state's anti-miscegenation laws. Yet, there is no evidence that anyone in South Texas was prosecuted for violating this law. The rates of this interracial marriage dynamic can be traced back to when black men moved into the Lower Rio Grande Valley after the Civil War ended. They married into ethnic Mexican families and joined other black people who found sanctuary on the U.S./Mexico border.[39]

In the mid 19th to 20th centuries, the Chinese that migrated were almost entirely of Cantonese origin. Hundreds of thousands of Chinese men in the U.S, mostly of Cantonese origin from Taishan migrated to the United States. Anti-miscegenation laws in many states prohibited Chinese men from marrying white women.[40] After the Emancipation Proclamation, many intermarriages in some states were not recorded and historically, Chinese American men married African American women in high proportions to their total marriage numbers due to few Chinese American women being in the United States. After the Emancipation Proclamation, many Chinese Americans immigrated to the Southern states, particularly Arkansas, to work on plantations. For example, in 1880, the tenth US Census of Louisiana alone counted 57% of interracial marriages between these Chinese to be with black and 43% to be with white women.[41] Between 20 and 30 percent of the Chinese who lived in Mississippi married black women before 1940.[42] In a genetic study of 199 samples from African American males found one belong to haplogroup O2a ( or 0.5% )[43] It was discovered by historian Henry Louis Gates, Jr in the African American Lives documentary miniseries that NASA astronaut Mae Jemison has a significant (above 10%) genetic East Asian admixture. Gates speculated that the intermarriage/relations between migrant Chinese workers during the 19th century and black, or African-American slaves or ex-slaves may have contributed to her ethnic genetic make-up. In the mid 1850s, 70 to 150 Chinese were living in New York City and 11 of them married Irish women. In 1906 the New York Times (6 August) reported that 300 white women (Irish American) were married to Chinese men in New York, with many more cohabited. In 1900, based on Liang research, of the 120,000 men in more than 20 Chinese communities in the United States, he estimated that one out of every twenty Chinese men (Cantonese) was married to white women.[44] In the 1960s census showed 3500 Chinese men married to white women and 2900 Chinese women married to white men.[45]

Accusations of support for miscegenation were commonly made by slavery defenders against Abolitionists before the Civil War. After the war, similar charges were used by white segregationists against advocates of equal rights for African Americans. They were said to be secretly plotting the destruction of the white race through miscegenation. In the 1950s, segregationists alleged a Communist plot funded by the Soviet Union with that goal. In 1957, segregationists cite the anti-semitic hoax A Racial Program for the Twentieth Century as evidence for these claims.

Bob Jones University banned interracial dating until 2000.[46]

Asians were specifically included in some state laws. California continued to ban Asian/white marriages until the Perez v. Sharp decision in 1948.


Tiger Woods refers to his ethnic make-up as "Cablinasian" (Caucasian, black, Indian, and Asian) to describe the racial mixture he inherited from his African-American father and Thai mother.[47]
In the United States, segregationists, including modern Christian Identity groups, have claimed that several passages in the Bible,[48] for example the stories of Phinehas and of the so-called "curse of Ham," should be understood as referring to miscegenation and that certain verses expressly forbid it. Most theologians read these verses and references as forbidding interreligious marriage, rather than interracial marriage.[49]

Interracial marriage has become increasingly accepted in the United States since the Civil Rights movement and up to the present day.[50] Approval of mixed marriages in national opinion polls has risen from 4% in 1958, 20% in 1968 (at the time of the SCOTUS decision), 36% in 1978, to 48% in 1991, 65% in 2002, 77% in 2007, and 86% in 2011.[51][52] The most notable American of mixed race is the current President of the United States, Barack Obama, who is the product of a mixed marriage between a black father and white mother. Nevertheless, as late as 2009, a Louisiana justice of the peace refused to issue a marriage license to an interracial couple, justifying the decision on grounds of concern for any children the couple might have.[53]

Hawaii[edit]
The majority of Hawaiian Chinese were Cantonese migrants from Guangdong with a minority from Hakka. If all people with Chinese ancestry in Hawaii (including the Chinese-Hawaiians) are included, they form about 1/3 of Hawaii's entire population. Many thousands of them married women of Hawaiian as well as Hawaiian/European and European origin. A large percentage of the Chinese men married Hawaiian and Hawaiian/European women. The 12,592 Asiatic-Hawaiians enumerated in 1930 were the result of Chinese men intermarrying with Hawaiian and part Hawaiian/European. Most Asiatic-Hawaiians men also married Hawaiians and European women (and vice versa). On the census some Chinese with little native blood would be classified as Chinese, not as Asiatic-Hawaiians due to dilution of native blood. Intermarriage started to decline in the 1920s.[54][55] Portuguese and other Caucasian women often married Chinese men.[56][57] These unions between Chinese men and Portuguese women resulted in children of mixed Chinese Portuguese parentage, called Chinese-Portuguese. For two years ending 30 June 1933, 38 of these children were born; they were classified as pure Chinese because their fathers were Chinese.[54] A large amount of mingling took place between Chinese and Portuguese, Chinese men married Portuguese, Spanish, Hawaiian, Caucasian-Hawaiian, etc.[58][59][60][61] Only one Chinese man was recorded marrying an American woman.[62][63] Chinese men in Hawaii also married Puerto Rican, Portuguese, Japanese, Greek, and half -white women.[64][65]

Latin America[edit]

Free Women of Color with their Children and Servants, oil painting by Agostino Brunias, Dominica, c. 1764C1796

A Brazilian family each generation becoming "whiter" (black grandmother, mulatto mother and white child), 1895
About 300,000 Cantonese coolies and migrants (almost all males) were shipped during 1849C1874 to Latin America; many of them intermarried and cohabited with the Black, Mestizo, and European population of Cuba, Peru, Guyana, and Trinidad.

In addition, Latin American societies also witnessed growth in both Church-sanctioned and common law marriages between Africans and the non colored.[66]

Peru[edit]
About 100,000 Chinese coolies (almost all males) during 1849C1874 migrated to Peru and intermarried with Peruvian women of Mestizo, European, Ameridian, European/Mestizo, African and mulatto origin. Thus, many Peruvian Chinese today are of mixed Chinese, Spanish, African, or Ameridian ancestry. One estimate for Chinese-Peruvian mixture is about 1.3C1.6 millions. Asian Peruvians are estimated to be 3% of the population, but one source places the number of citizens with some Chinese ancestry at 4.2 million, which equates to 15% of the country's total population.[67] In Peru non-Chinese women married the mostly male Chinese coolies.[68]

There were almost no women among the nearly entirely male Chinese coolie population that migrated to Peru and Cuba.[69][70] Peruvian women were married to these Chinese male migrants.[71][72][73][74][75] African women particularly had mostly no intercourse with Chinese men during their labor as coolies, while Chinese had contact with Peruvian women in cities, there they formed relationships and sired mixed babies, these women originated from Andean and coastal areas and did not originally come from the cities, in the haciendas on the coast in rural areas, native young women of indgenas (native) and serranas (mountain) origin from the Andes mountains would come down to work, these Andean native women were favored as marital partners by Chinese men over Africans, with matchmakers arranging for communal marriages of Chinese men to indgenas and serranas young women.[76] There was a racist reaction by Peruvians to the marriages of Peruvian women and Chinese men.[77] When native Peruvian women (cholas et natives, Indias, indgenas) and Chinese men had mixed children, the children were called injerto and once these injertos emerged, Chinese men then sought out girls of injertas origins as marriage partners, children born to black mothers were not called injertos.[78] Low class Peurvians established sexual unions or marriages with the Chinese men and some black and Indian women "bred" with the Chinese according to Alfredo Sachett, who claimed the mixing was causing the Chinese to suffer from "progressive degeneration", in Casa Grande highland Indian women and Chinese men participated in communal "mass marriages" with each other, arranged when highland women were brought by a Chinese matchmaker after receiving a down payment.[79][80]

In Peru and Cuba some Indian (Native American), mulatto, black, and white women engaged in carnal relations or marriages with Chinese men, with marriages of mulatto, black, and white woman being reported by the Cuba Commission Report and in Peru it was reported by the New York Times that Peruvian black and Indian (Native) women married Chinese men to their own advantage and to the disadvantage of the men since they dominated and "subjugated" the Chinese men despite the fact that the labor contract was annulled by the marriage, reversing the roles in marriage with the Peruvian woman holding marital power, ruling the family and making the Chinese men slavish, docile, "servile", "submissive" and "feminine" and commanding them around, reporting that "Now and then...he [the Chinese man] becomes enamored of the charms of some sombre-hued chola (Native Indian and mestiza woman) or samba (mixed black woman), and is converted and joins the Church, so that may enter the bonds of wedlock with the dusky se?orita."[81] Chinese men were sought out as husbands and considered a "catch" by the "dusky damsels" (Peruvian women) because they were viewed as a "model husband, hard-working, affectionate, faithful and obedient" and "handy to have in the house", the Peruvian women became the "better half" instead of the "weaker vessel" and would command their Chinese husbands "around in fine style" instead of treating them equally, while the labor contract of the Chinese coolie would be nullified by the marriage, the Peruvian wife viewed the nullification merely as the previous "master" handing over authority over the Chinese man to her as she became his "mistress", keeping him in "servitude" to her, speedily ending any complaints and suppositions by the Chinese men that they would have any power in the marriage.[82]

Cuba[edit]
120,000 Cantonese coolies (all males) entered Cuba under contract for 80 years. Most did not marry, but Hung Hui (1975:80) states there was a frequency of sexual activity between black women and Cantonese coolies. According to Osberg, (1965:69) the Chinese often bought slave women and freed them, expressly for marriage. In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, Chinese men (Cantonese) engaged in sexual activity with white and black Cuban women, and from such relations many children were born. (For a British Caribbean model of Chinese cultural retention through procreation with black women, see Patterson, 322-31).[83] In the 1920s an additional 30000 Cantonese and small groups of Japanese arrived; both immigrations were exclusively male, and there was rapid mingling with white, black, and mulato populations.[84][85] In the CIA World Factbook: Cuba (15 May 2008) the authors estimated 114,240 people with Chinese-Cuban ancestry and only 300 pure Chinese.[86] In the study of genetic origin, admixture, and asymmetry in maternal and paternal human lineages in Cuba, 35 Y-chromosome SNPs were typed in the 132 male individuals of the Cuban sample. The study did not include any people with some Chinese ancestry. All the samples were white and black Cubans. 2 out of 132 male samples belong to East Asian Haplogroup O2 which is found in significant frequencies among Cantonese people.[87]

Costa Rica[edit]
The Chinese in Costa Rica originated from Cantonese male migrants. Pure Chinese make up only 1% of the Costa Rican population but, according to Jacqueline M. Newman, as much as ten percent of the people in Costa Rica are Chinese, if counting the people who are Chinese, married to a Chinese, or of mixed Chinese descent.[88] Most Chinese immigrants since then have been Cantonese, but in the last decades of the 20th century, a number of immigrants have also come from Taiwan. Many men came alone to work, married Costa Rican women, and speak Cantonese. However, the majority of the descendants of the first Chinese immigrants no longer speak Cantonese and think of themselves as full Costa Ricans.[89] They married Tican women (who are a blend of European, Castizo, Mestizo, Indian, Black).[90] A Tican is also a white person with small amount of non-white blood, like Castizo. The 1989 census shows about 98% of Costa Ricans were either White, Castizo, Mestizos, with 80% being White or Castizo. Up to the 1940s men made up the vast majority of the Costa Rican Chinese community.[91] Males made up the majority of the original Chinese community in Mexico and they married Mexican women.[92]

Many Africans in Costa Rica also intermarried with other races. In late colonial Cartago, 33% of 182 married African males and 7% of married African females were married to a spouse of another race. The figures were even more striking in San Jose' where 55% of the 134 married African males and 35% of the 65 married African females were married to another race (mostly mestizos). In Cartago itself, two African males were enumerated with Spanish wives and three with Indian wives, while nine African females were married to Indian males. Spaniards rarely cohabited with mulatto women except in the cattle range region bordering Nicaragua to the north. There as well, two Spanish women were living with African males.[66]


Mulatto child of a white father and black mother, Mexico, 18th century
British West Indies[edit]
Miscegenation has never been illegal in the British West Indies, and the populations of Guyana,[93][94][95] Belize,[96][97][98] Jamaica,[99][100] and Trinidad.[101][102][103][104][105] are today among the world's most diverse.

Mexico[edit]

Castas painting showing the various race combinations of Colonial Mexico.
In Mexico, the concept of mestizaje (or the cultural and racial amalgamation) is an integral part of the country's identity. While frequently seen as a mixture of the indigenous and Spanish, Mexico has had a notable admixture of African and Asian heritage since the Colonial era.[106] Although reluctant at first, the Spanish government eventually legalized interracial marriage (which applied to all unions). Such relationships were still not accepted by the church however. Black female slaves also did not gain any freedom from such unions.[106]

Argentina[edit]
In Buenos Aires in 1810, only 2.2 percent of African men and 2.5 percent of African women were married to the non colored (white). In 1827, the figures increased to 3.0 percent for men and 6.0 percent for women. Racial mixing increased even further as more African men began enlisting in the army. Between 1810 and 1820 only 19.9% of African men were enlisted in the army. Between 1850 and 1860, this number increased to 51.1%. This led to a sexual imbalance between African men and women in Argentine. Unions between African women and non-colored men became more common in the wake of massive Italian immigration to the country. This led one African male editorial commentator to quip that, given to the sexual imbalance in the community, black women who "could not get bread would have to settle for pasta".[66]

Guatemala[edit]
There were many instances when black and mulatto men would intermarry with Mayan and other native women in Guatemala. These unions were more common in some regions than others. In Escuintla (called Escuintepeque at the time), the Pipil-speaking natives who lived at higher elevations tended to live away from the lowland coastal hot lands where black and mulatto men were concentrated. Yet, as black men grew in number during this period (1671C1701), a tendency developed for them to marry native women. In Zapotitln (also known as Suchitepquez), Spaniards were proportionately more significant than in Escuintla. Thus the smaller African population had less opportunity for endogamy and was disappearing by the early 18th Century as blacks married Mayans and mulattoes married mestizos and lower-ranking Spaniards. Finally in Guazacapn, a Pipil district that was 10% non native, church marriages between Mayas or Pipils and free mulattoes were rare. But black men frequently married Mayan women in informal unions, which resulted in a significant population of mestizaje here and throughout the coastal region. In the Valle de las Vacas, black male slaves also intermarried with Mayan women.[107]

El Salvador[edit]
In El Salvador, there was frequent intermarriage between black male slaves and Amerindian women. Many of these slaves intermarried with Amerindian women in hopes of gaining freedom (if not for themselves, then their offspring). Many mixed African and Amerindian children resulted from these unions. The Spanish tried to prevent such Afro-Amerindian unions, but the mixing of the two groups could not be prevented. Slaves continued to pursue natives with the prospect of freedom. According to Richard Price's book Maroon Societies (1979), it is documented that during the colonial period that Amerindian women would rather marry black men than Amerindian men, and that black men would rather marry Amerindian women than black women so that their children will be born free. Price quoted this from a history by H.H. Bancroft published in 1877 referring to colonial Mexico. El Salvador's African population lived under similar circumstances, and the mixing between black men and native women was common during colonial times.[108]

Bolivia[edit]
During the colonial period, many black people often intermarried with the native population (mostly Aymara). The result of these relationships was the blending between the two cultures (Aymara and Afro-Bolivian).

After Bolivia's Agrarian Reform of 1953, black people (like indigenous people) migrated from their agricultural villages to the cities of La Paz, Cochabamba, and Santa Cruz in search of better educational and employment opportunities. Related to this, black individuals began intermarrying with people of a lighter skin coloring such as blancos (whites) and mestizos. This was done as a means of better integration for themselves, and especially their children, into Bolivian society.[109]

Jamaica and Haiti[edit]
By some estimates, 80,000 North American and European women (most of them over the age of 40) visit Jamaica and Haiti every year for sex with young men (mostly in their 20s).[110] They're called "milk bottles."[111] While HIV/AIDS infection rates in the Caribbean are much higher than in Canada or the U.S., female sex tourists often ignore the risk and fail to use condoms.[112]

Asia[edit]
Inter-ethnic marriage in Southeast Asia dates back to the spread of Indian culture, Hinduism and Buddhism to the region. From the 1st century onwards, mostly male traders and merchants from the Indian subcontinent frequently intermarried with the local female populations in Cambodia, Burma, Champa, Central Siam, the Malay Peninsula, and Malay Archipelago. Many Indianized kingdoms arose in Southeast Asia during the Middle Ages.[113]

From the 9th century onwards, a large number of mostly male Arab traders from the Middle East settled down in the Malay Peninsula and Malay Archipelago, and they intermarried with the local Malay, Indonesian and female populations in the islands later called the Philippines. This contributed to the spread of Islam in Southeast Asia.[114] From the 14th to the 17th centuries, many Chinese, Indian and Arab traders settled down within the maritime kingdoms of Southeast Asia and intermarried with the local female populations. This tradition continued among Portuguese traders who also intermarried with the local populations.[115] In the 16th and 17th centuries, thousands of Japanese people also travelled to Southeast Asia and intermarried with the local women there.[116]

From the tenth to twelfth century, Persian women were to be found in Guangzhou (Canton), some of them in the tenth century like Mei Zhu in the harem of the Emperor Liu Chang, and in the twelfth century large numbers of Persian women lived there, noted for wearing multiple earrings and "quarrelsome dispositions".[117] Multiple women originating from the Persian Gulf lived in Guangzhou's foreign quarter, they were all called "Persian women" (D Po-ssu-fu or Bosifu).[118] Some scholars did not differentiate between Persian and Arab, and some say that the Chinese called all women coming from the Persian Gulf "Persian Women".[119]

Some 100,000 Amerasians stayed in Vietnam after the fall of Saigon.[120] During and after the Indonesian National Revolution (1945C1965) around 300,000 people, pre-dominantly Eurasians, left Indonesia to go to the Netherlands.[121]

In the 19th century and early 20th century, there was a network of small numbers of Chinese and Japanese prostitutes being trafficked across Asia, in countries such as China, Japan, Korea, Singapore and British India, in what was then known as the Yellow Slave Traffic. There was also a network of prostitutes from continental Europe being trafficked to India, Ceylon, Singapore, China and Japan at around the same time, in what was then known as the White Slave Traffic.[122]


Rangoon, Burma. 8 August 1945. A young ethnic Chinese woman who was in one of the Imperial Japanese Army's "comfort stations" is interviewed by an Allied officer.
During World War II, Japanese soldiers engaged in war rape during their invasions across East Asia and Southeast Asia. The term "comfort women" is a euphemism for the estimated 200,000, mostly Korean and Chinese, women who were forced into prostitution in Japanese military brothels during World War II. Some Indo Dutch women, captured in Dutch colonies in Asia, were also forced into sexual slavery.[123] More than 20,000 Indonesian women[124] and nearly 300 Dutch women were so treated.[125]

Sex tourism has emerged in the late 20th century as a controversial aspect of Western tourism and globalization. Sex tourism is typically undertaken internationally by tourists from wealthier countries. Author Nils Ringdal alleges that three out of four men between the ages of 20 and 50 who have visited Asia or Africa have paid for sex.[126]

Female sex tourism also emerged in the late 20th century in Bali. Tens of thousands of single women throng the beaches of Bali in Indonesia every year. For decades, young Balinese men have taken advantage of the louche and laid-back atmosphere to find love and lucre from female touristsJapanese, European and Australian for the most partwho by all accounts seem perfectly happy with the arrangement.[127]

China[edit]
There have been various periods in the history of China where a number of Arabs, Persians and Turks from the western regions (Central Asia and West Asia) migrated to China, beginning with the arrival of Islam during the Tang Dynasty in the 7th century. Due to the majority of these immigrants being male, some decided to intermarry with local Chinese females. Intermarriage was initially discouraged by the Tang Dynasty. In 836 Lu Chun was appointed as governor of Canton, he was disgusted to find Chinese living with foreigners and intermarriage between Chinese and foreigners. Lu enforced separation, banning interracial marriages, and made it illegal for foreigners to own property. Lu Chun believed his principles were just and upright.[128] The 836 law specifically banned Chinese from forming relationships with "dark peoples" or "people of colour", which was used to describe foreigners, such as "Iranians, Sogdians, Arabs, Indians, Malays, Sumatrans", among others.[129][130] The Song Dynasty allowed third-generation immigrants with official titles to intermarry with Chinese imperial princesses.[131]

Iranian, Arab and Turkic women also occasionally migrated to China and mixed with Chinese.[131] From the tenth to twelfth century, Persian women were to be found in Guangzhou (Canton), some of them in the tenth century like Mei Zhu in the harem of the Emperor Liu Chang, and in the twelfth century large numbers of Persian women lived there, noted for wearing multiple earrings and "quarrelsome dispositions".[117][132] Multiple women originating from the Persian Gulf lived in Guangzhou's foreign quarter; they were all called "Persian women" (D; Po-szu-fu or Bosifu).[133] Iranian female dancers were in demand in China during this period. During the Sui dynasty, ten young dancing girls were sent from Persia to China. During the Tang dynasty bars were often attended by Iranian or Sogdian waitresses who performed dances for clients.[128][134][135][136]

During the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period (Wudai) (907C960), there are examples of Persian women marrying Chinese emperors. Some Chinese officials from the Song Dynasty era also married women from Dashi (Arabia).[137]

Of the Han Chinese Li family in Quanzhou, Li Nu, the son of Li Lu, visited Hormuz in Persia in 1376, married a Persian or an Arab girl, and brought her back to Quanzhou. He then converted to Islam. Li Nu was the ancestor of the Ming Dynasty reformer Li Chih.[138][139][140]

By the 14th century, the total population of Muslims in China had grown to 4 million.[141] After Mongol rule had been ended by the Ming Dynasty in 1368, this led to a violent Chinese backlash against West and Central Asians. In order to contain the violence, the Ming administration instituted a policy where all West and Central Asian males were required to intermarry with native Chinese females, hence assimilating them into the local population. Their descendants are today known as the Hui people.[131] 6.7% of Hui people's maternal genetics have a Caucasian origin, while slightly over 30% of paternal genetics also have a Caucasian origin.[142]

Han women who married Hui men became Hui, and Han men who married Hui women also became Hui.[143][144][145]

In the frontier districts of Sichuan, numerous half Chinese-Tibetans were found. Tibetan women were glad to marry Chinese traders and soldiers.[146] Some Chinese traders married Tibetan girls.[147] Traders and officials in ancient times were often forbidden to bring Chinese women with them to Tibet, so they tended to marry Tibetan women; the male offspring were considered Chinese and female offspring as Tibetan.[148][149][150] Special names were used for these children of Chinese fathers and Tibetan mothers.[151] They often assimilated into the Tibetan population.[152] Chinese and Nepalese in Tibet married Tibetan women.[153]

Chinese men also married Turkic Uyghur women in Xinjiang from 1880 to 1949. Sometimes poverty influenced Uyghur women to marry Chinese. These marriages were not recognized by local mullahs since Muslims women were not allowed to marry non-Muslim men under Islamic law. This did not stop the women because they enjoyed advantages, such as not being subject to certain taxes. Uyghur women married to Chinese also did not have to wear a veil and they received their husband's property upon his death. These women were forbidden from being buried in Muslim graves. The children of Chinese men and Uyghur women were considered as Uyghur. Some Chinese soldiers had Uyghur women as temporary wives, and after the man's military service was up, the wife was left behind or sold, and if it was possible, sons were taken, and daughters were sold.[154]

European travellers noted that many Han Chinese in Xinjiang married Uyghur (who were called turki) women and had children with them. A Chinese was spotted with a "young" and "good looking" Uyghur wife and another Chinese left behind his Uyghur wife and child in Khotan.[155][156][157][158]

After 1950, some intermarriage between Han and Uyghur peoples continued. A Han married a Uyghur woman in 1966 and had three daughters with her, and other cases of intermarriage also continued.[159][160]

Ever since the 1960s, African students were allowed by the Chinese government to study in China as friendly relations with Africans and African-related people was important to CCP's "Third World" coalition. Many African male students began to intermingle with the local Chinese women. Relationships between black men and Chinese women often led to numerous clashes between Chinese and African students in the 1980s as well as grounds for arrest and deportation of African students. The Nanjing anti-African protests of 1988 were triggered by confrontations between Chinese and Africans. New rules and regulations were made in order to stop African men from consorting with Chinese women. Two African men who were escorting Chinese women on a Christmas Eve party were stopped at the gate and along with several other factors escalated. The Nanjing protests lasted from Christmas Eve of 1988 to January 1989. Many new rules were set after the protests ended, including one where black men could only have one Chinese girlfriend at a time whose visits were limited to the lounge area.[161]

There is a small but growing population of mixed marriages between male African (mostly Nigerian) traders and local Chinese women in the city of Guangzhou where it is estimated that in 2013 there are 400 African-Chinese families.[162] The rise in mixed marriages has not been without controversy. The state, fearing fraud marriages, has strictly regulated matters. In order to obtain government-issued identification (which is required to attend school), the children must be registered under the Chinese mother's family name. Many African fathers, fearing that in doing so, they would relinquish their parental rights, have instead chosen to not send their children to school. There are efforts to open an African-Chinese school but it would first require government authorization.[162]

Taiwan[edit]
During the Siege of Fort Zeelandia in which Chinese Ming loyalist forces commanded by Koxinga besieged and defeated the Dutch East India Company and conquered Taiwan, the Chinese took Dutch women and children prisoner. Koxinga took Hambroek's teenage daughter as a concubine,[163][164][165] and Dutch women were sold to Chinese soldiers to become their wives.In 1684 some of these Dutch wives were still captives of the Chinese.[166]

Some Dutch physical looks like auburn and red hair among people in regions of south Taiwan are a consequence of this episode of Dutch women becoming concubines to the Chinese commanders.[167]

Hong Kong[edit]
Many Tanka women conceived children with foreign men. Ernest John Eitel mentioned in 1889 how an important change had taken place among Eurasian girls, the offspring of illicit connections: instead of becoming concubines, they were commonly brought up respectably and married to Hong Kong Chinese husbands. Many Hong Kong born Eurasians were assimilated into the Hong Kong society by intermarriage with the Cantonese population. A good example of a Cantonese Eurasian is Nancy Kwan, a Hollywood sex symbol. Kwan was of Eurasian origin, born in 1939 in Hong Kong to a father who was a Cantonese architect and mother who is a model of British and Scottish descent. The martial artist Bruce Lee had a Cantonese father and a Eurasian mother.

Main article: Tanka people
Ernest John Eitel controversially claimed that most "half caste" people in Hong Kong were descended exclusively from Europeans having relationship with Tanka women. The theory that most of the Eurasian mixed race Hong Kong people are descended only from Tanka women and European men, and not ordinary Cantonese women, has been backed up by other researchers who pointed out that Tanka women freely consorted with foreigners due to the fact that they were not bound by the same Confucian traditions as the Cantonese, and having a relationship with a European man was advantageous for Tanka women, but Lethbridge criticized it as "a 'myth' propagated by xenophobic Cantonese to account for the establishment of the Hong Kong Eurasian community". Carl Smith's study in late 1960s on the protected women seems, to some degree, to support Ernest John Eitel's theory. Smith says that the Tankas experienced certain restrictions within the traditional Chinese social structure. Being a group marginal to the traditional Chinese society of the Puntis (Cantonese), they did not have the same social pressure in dealing with Europeans. The ordinary Cantonese women did not sleep with European men, thus the Eurasian population was formed mostly from Tanka and European admixture.[168][169][170][171]

They invaded Hongkong the moment the settlement was started, living at first on boats in the harbour with their numerous families, gradually settling on shore. They have maintained ever since almost a monopoly of the supply of pilots and ships' crews, of the fish trade and the cattle trade, but unfortunately also of the trade in girls and women. Strange to say, when the settlement was first started, it was estimated that some 2,000 of these Tan-ka people had flocked to Hongkong, but at the present time they are abont the same number, a tendency having set in among them to settle on shore rather than on the water and to disavow their Tan-ka extraction in order to mix on equal terms with the mass of the Chinese community. The half-caste population in Hongkong were, from the earliest days of the settlement of the Colony and down to the present day, almost exclusively the off-spring of these Tan-ka people. But, like the Tan-ka people themselves, they are happily under the influence of a process of continuous re-absorption into the mass of the Chinese residents of the Colony.[172]

South Asians have been living in Hong Kong throughout the colonial period, before the independence in 1947 into the nations of India and Pakistan. They migrated to Hong Kong and worked as police officers as well as army officers during colonial rule. 25,000 of the Muslims in Hong Kong trace their roots back to what is now Pakistan. Around half of them belong to 'local boy' families, Muslims of mixed Chinese and South Asian ancestry, descended from early Indian/Pakistani Muslim immigrants who took local Chinese wives and brought their children up as Muslims.[173][174]

Macao[edit]
The early Macanese ethnic group was formed from Portuguese men intermarrying with Malay, Japanese and Indian women.[175] The Portuguese encouraged Chinese migration to Macao, and most Macanese in Macao were formed from intermarriages between Portuguese and Chinese. In 1810, the total population of Macao was about 4,033, of which 1,172 were white men, 1,830 were white women, 425 were male slaves, and 606 were female slaves. In 1830, the population increased to 4,480 and the breakdown was 1,202 white men, 2,149 white women, 350 male slaves and 779 female slaves. There is reason to speculate that large numbers of white women were involved in some forms of prostitution which would probably explain the abnormality in the ratio between men and women among the white population.[176]

Rarely did Chinese women marry Portuguese; initially, mostly Goans, Ceylonese (from today's Sri Lanka), Indochinese, Malay, and Japanese women were the wives of the Portuguese men in Macau.[177][178][179][180][181] Japanese girls would be purchased in Japan by Portuguese men.[182] Many Chinese became Macanese simply by converting to Catholicism, and had no ancestry from Portuguese, having assimilated into the Macanese people.[183] The majority of the early intermarriages of people from China with Portuguese were between Portuguese men and women of Tanka origin, who were considered the lowest class of people in China and had relations with Portuguese settlers and sailors, or low class Chinese women.[184][185][186] Western men were refused by high class Chinese women, who did not marry foreigners.[187] In fact, in those days, the matrimonial context of production was usually constituted by Chinese women of low socio-economic status who were married to or concubines of Portuguese or Macanese men. Very rarely did Chinese women of higher status agree to marry a Westerner. As Deolinda argues in one of her short stories, "even should they have wanted to do so out of romantic infatuation, they would not be allowed to. Macanese men and women also married with the Portuguese and Chinese; as a result some Macanese became indistinguishable from the Chinese or Portuguese population. Because the majority of the Chinese population who migrated to Macao was Cantonese, Macao became a Cantonese speaking society, and other ethnic groups became fluent in Cantonese. Most Macanese had paternal Portuguese heritage until 1974.[185] It was in the 1980s that Macanese and Portuguese women began to marry men who defined themselves ethnically as Chinese, which resulted in many Macanese with Cantonese paternal ancestry.[187]

Literature in Macao was written about love affairs and marriage between the Tanka women and Portuguese men, like "A-Chan, A Tancareira", by Henrique de Senna Fernandes.[188][189][190]

After the handover of Macao to China in 1999 many Macanese migrated to other countries. Of the Portuguese and Macanese women who stayed in Macao, many married with local Cantonese men, and so many Macanese also now have Cantonese paternal heritage. There are between 25,000C46,000 Macanese, but only 5,000C8,000 live in Macao, while most live in Latin America, the U.S., Portugal. Unlike the Macanese of Macao who are strictly of Chinese and Portuguese heritage, many Macanese living abroad are not entirely of Portuguese and Chinese ancestry. Many Macanese men and women intermarried with the local population of the U.S. and Latin America and have only partial Macanese heritage.

Indian subcontinent[edit]

The Indian actress Katrina Kaif is the daughter of an Indian father and a British (English) mother.

"Lakm", the Opera deals with the romantic relationship between a British Officer and an Indian Brahmin woman.

An oil painting of Khair-un-Nissa by George Chinnery. c. 1805. Begum Khair-un-Nissa was a Muslim Indian Hyderabadi noblewoman who fell in love and married the British Lieutenant Colonel James Achilles Kirkpatrick.
The Indian subcontinent has a long history of inter-ethnic marriage dating back to ancient history. Various groups of people have been intermarrying for millennia in South Asia, including speakers of the Dravidian, Indo-Aryan, Austroasiatic and Tibeto-Burman languages.

The origins and affinities of the approximately 1 billion people living on the subcontinent of India have long been contested. This is owing, in part, to the many different waves of immigrants that have influenced the genetic structure of India. In the most recent of these waves, Indo-European-speaking nomadic groups from the Near East, Anatolia and the Caucasus migrated to India.[191] According to 19th-century British historians, it was these "Aryans" who established the caste system, an elitist form of social organization that separated the "light-skinned" Indo-Aryan conquerors from the "conquered dark-skinned" indigenous Dravidian population through enforcement of "racial endogamy". Much of this was simply conjecture, fueled by British imperialism;[192] British policies of divide and rule as well as enumeration of the population into rigid categories during the tenure of British rule in India contributed towards the hardening of these segregated caste identities.[193] Since the independence of India from British rule, the concept of a historical "Aryan Invasion and subjugation of the dark skinned Dravidians in India" has become a staple polemic in South Asian geopolitics, including the propaganda of Indophobia in Pakistan.[194] There is no decisive theory as to the origins of the caste system in India, and globally renowned historians and archaeologists like Jim Shaffer, J.P. Mallory, Edwin Bryant, and others, have disputed the claim of "Aryan Invasion".[195]

Some researchers claim that genetic similarities to Europeans were more common in members of the higher ranks.[196] Their findings, published in Genome Research, supported the idea that members of higher castes are more closely related to Europeans than are the lower castes.[197] According to the research, invading European populations were predominantly male who intermarried with local females and formed the upper castes, i.e., the local females had upward mobility in caste which was denied to local males. However, other researchers have criticized and contradicted this claim.[198] A study by Joanna L. Mountain et al. of Stanford University concluded that there was "no clear separation into three genetically distinct groups along caste lines", although "an inferred tree revealed some clustering according to caste affiliation".[199] A 2006 study by Ismail Thanseem et al. of Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (India) concluded that the "lower caste groups might have originated with the hierarchical divisions that arose within the tribal groups with the spread of Neolithic agriculturalists, much earlier than the arrival of Aryan speakers", and "the Indo-Europeans established themselves as upper castes among this already developed caste-like class structure within the tribes."[200] A 2006 genetic study by the National Institute of Biologicals in India, testing a sample of men from 32 tribal and 45 caste groups, concluded that the Indians have acquired very few genes from Indo-European speakers.[201] More recent studies have also debunked the claims that so-called "Aryans" and "Dravidians" have a "racial divide". A study conducted by the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology in 2009 (in collaboration with Harvard Medical School, Harvard School of Public Health and the Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT) analyzed half a million genetic markers across the genomes of 132 individuals from 25 ethnic groups from 13 states in India across multiple caste groups.[202] The study establishes, based on the impossibility of identifying any genetic indicators across caste lines, that castes in South Asia grew out of traditional tribal organizations during the formation of Indian society, and were not the product of any Aryan invasion and subjugation of Dravidian people.

In Goa, a Portuguese colony in India, during the late 16th century and 17th century, there was a community of over thousand Japanese slaves and traders, who were either Japanese Christians fleeing persecution in Japan,[203] or young Japanese women and girls brought or captured as sexual slaves by Portuguese traders and their South Asian lascar crew members from Japan.[204] In both cases, they often intermarried with the local population in Goa.[203]

One example of an interracial liaison during colonial times involved Hyderabadi noblewoman Khair-un-Nissa and her relationship to Scottish resident James Achilles Kirkpatrick.

The 600,000-strong Anglo-Indian community was formed by British and Indian relationships. Such relationships have had an influence on the arts. Lakm, an opera by the Frenchman Lo Delibes, deals with the romantic relationship between the British officer Grald and the daughter of a Hindu high priest Lakm (Laxmi in Sanskrit). The novel "Two Leaves and a Bud" by Ananda depicts Indian laborer women in India being preyed upon and seduced by the British Manager Reggie Hunt after he gives them bangles and nose rings.[205]

In Ceylon (present day Sri Lanka), interracial relationships between Dutch, British and Portuguese men and local women were common. The 65,000-strong Burgher community was formed by the interracial marriages of Dutch and Portuguese men with local Sinhalese and Tamil women. In addition to intermarriage, inter-ethnic prostitution in India was also fairly common at the time, when British officers would frequently visit Indian nautch dancers. In the mid-19th century, there were around 40,000 British soldiers but fewer than 2,000 British officials present in India.[206] Many British and other European officers had their own harems made up of Indian women similar to those the Nawabs and kings of India had. In the 19th century and early 20th century, thousands of women and girls from continental Europe were also trafficked into British India (and Ceylon), where they worked as prostitutes servicing both British soldiers and local Indian (and Ceylonese) men.[122][207][208]

As British females began arriving in British India in large numbers from the early-to-mid-19th century, interracial marriage became increasingly uncommon in India. Interracial relationships were also despised after the events of India's First War of Independence, where Indian sepoys rebelled against the British East India Company.

The idea of protecting British female chastity from the "lustful Indian male" had a significant influence on the policies of the British Raj in order to prevent racial miscegenation between the British females and the native Indian male population. While some restrictive policies were imposed on British females in order to protect them from miscegenation, most of these policies were directed against native Indian males.[209][210]

For example, the 1883 Ilbert Bill, which would have granted Indian judges the right to judge British offenders, was opposed by many British colonialists on the grounds that Indian judges cannot be trusted in dealing with cases involving British females.[211] In the aftermath of the 1919 Amritsar Massacre, the long-held stereotype of Indian males as dark-skinned rapists lusting after white British females was challenged by several novels such as A Passage to India (1924) and The Jewel in the Crown (1966), both of which involve an Indian male being wrongly accused of raping a British female.[212]

When Burma was ruled under the administration of British India, millions of Indians, mostly Muslim, migrated there. The small population of mixed descendants of Indian males and local Burmese females are called "Zerbadees", often in a pejorative sense implying mixed race.[213]

In Assam, local Indian women married several waves of Chinese migrants during British colonial times, to the point where it became hard to physically differentiate Chinese in Assam from locals during the time of their internment during the 1962 war, and the majority of these Chinese in Assam were married to Indian women, and some of these Indian women were deported to China with their husbands.[214][215][216][217][218][219][220][221][222][223]

In the 19th century, when the British Straits Settlement shipped Chinese convicts to be jailed in India, the Chinese men then settled in the Nilgiri mountains near Naduvattam after their release and married Tamil Paraiyan women, having mixed Chinese-Tamil children with them. They were documented by Edgar Thurston.[224][225] Paraiyan is also anglicized as "pariah".

Thurston described the colony of the Chinese men with their Tamil pariah wives and children: "Halting in the course of a recent anthropological expedition on the western side of the Nilgiri plateau, in the midst of the Government Cinchona plantations, I came across a small settlement of Chinese, who have squatted for some years on the slopes of the hills between Naduvatam and Gudalur, and developed, as the result of ' marriage ' with Tamil pariah women, into a colony, earning an honest livelihood by growing vegetables, cultivating coffee on a small scale, and adding to their income from these sources by the economic products of the cow. An ambassador was sent to this miniature Chinese Court with a suggestion that the men should, in return for monies, present themselves before me with a view to their measurements being recorded. The reply which came back was in its way racially characteristic as between Hindus and Chinese. In the case of the former, permission to make use of their bodies for the purposes of research depends essentially on a pecuniary transaction, on a scale varying from two to eight annas. The Chinese, on the other hand, though poor, sent a courteous message to the effect that they did not require payment in money, but would be perfectly happy if I would give them, as a memento, copies of their photographs."[226][227] Thurston further describe a specific family: "The father was a typical Chinaman, whose only grievance was that, in the process of conversion to Christianity, he had been obliged to 'cut him tail off.' The mother was a typical Tamil Pariah of dusky hue. The colour of the children was more closely allied to the yellowish tint of the father than to the dark tint of the mother; and the semimongol parentage was betrayed in the slant eyes, flat nose, and (in one case) conspicuously prominent cheek-bones."[228][229][230][231] Thurston's description of the Chinese-Tamil families were cited by others, one mentioned "an instance mating between a Chinese male with a Tamil Pariah female"[232][233] A 1959 book described attempts made to find out what happened to the colony of mixed Chinese and Tamils.[234]

Japan[edit]
See also: Comfort women, Eugenics in Japan, and Slavery_in_Japan  Portuguese_trade_in_Japanese_slaves

Europeans accompanied by Japanese courtesans in Dejima, the Dutch trading colony in the harbor of Nagasaki, early 19th century.
Inter-ethnic marriage in Japan dates back to the 7th century, when Chinese and Korean immigrants began intermarrying with the local Japanese population. In the 1590s, over 50,000 Koreans were forcibly brought to Japan during Hideyoshi's invasions of Korea, where they intermarried with the local population. In the 16th and 17th centuries, around 58,000 Japanese travelled abroad, many of whom intermarried with the local women in Southeast Asia.[116] During the anti-Christian persecutions in 1596, many Japanese Christians fled to Macau and other Portuguese colonies such as Goa, where there was a community of Japanese slaves and traders by the early 17th century. Intermarriage with the local populations in these Portuguese colonies also took place.[203] Portuguese traders in Japan also intermarried with the local Christian women.[235]

From the 15th century, Chinese, Korean and other Far Eastern visitors frequented brothels in Japan.[236] This practice later continued among visitors from the "Western Regions", mainly European traders.[204] This began with the arrival of Portuguese ships to Japan in the 16th century. Portuguese visitors and their South Asian (and sometimes African) crewmembers often engaged in slavery in Japan, where they bought Japanese slaves who were then taken to Macau and other Portuguese colonies in Southeast Asia, the Americas,[204] and India.[203] Later European East India companies, including those of the Dutch and British, also engaged in prostitution in Japan.[237] Marriage and sexual relations between European merchants and Japanese women was usual during this period.[238]

A large-scale slave trade developed in which Portuguese purchased Japanese as slaves in Japan and sold them to various locations overseas, including Portugal itself, throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.[239][240] Many documents mention the large slave trade along with protests against the enslavement of Japanese. Japanese slaves are believed to be the first of their nation to end up in Europe, and the Portuguese purchased large amounts of Japanese slave girls to bring to Portugal for sexual purposes, as noted by the Church in 1555. King Sebastian feared that it was having a negative effect on Catholic proselytization since the slave trade in Japanese was growing to massive proporations, so he commanded that it be banned in 1571.[241][242]

Japanese slave women were even sold as concubines to black African crewmembers, along with their European counterparts serving on Portuguese ships trading in Japan, mentioned by Luis Cerqueira, a Portuguese Jesuit, in a 1598 document.[243] Japanese slaves were brought by the Portuguese to Macau, where some of them not only ended up being enslaved to Portuguese, but as slaves to other slaves, with the Portuguese owning Malay and African slaves, who in turn owned Japanese slaves of their own.[244][245]

In the early part of the Shwa era, Japanese governments executed a eugenic policy to limit the birth of children with inferior traits, as well as aiming to protect the life and health of mothers.[246] Family Center staff also attempted to discourage marriage between Japanese women and Korean men who had been recruited from the peninsula as laborers following its annexation by Japan in 1910. In 1942, a survey report argued that "the Korean laborers brought to Japan, where they have established permanent residency, are of the lower classes and therefore of inferior constitution...By fathering children with Japanese women, these men could lower the caliber of the Yamato minzoku."

In 1928, journalist Shigenori Ikeda promoted 21 December as the blood-purity day (junketsu de) and sponsored free blood tests at the Tokyo Hygiene laboratory. By the early 1930s, detailed "eugenic marriage" questionnaires were printed or inserted in popular magazines for public consumption. Promoters like Ikeda were convinced that these marriage surveys would not only ensure the eugenic fitness of spouses but also help avoid class differences that could disrupt and even destroy marriage. The goal was to create a database of individuals and their entire households which would enable eugenicists to conduct in-depth surveys of any given family's genealogy.[247]

To prevent venereal diseases and rape by Japanese soldiers and to provide comfort to soldiers and head off espionage, the Imperial Japanese Army established "comfort stations" in the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere where around 200,000 women, mostly from Korea and China, were recruited or kidnapped by the Kempeitai or the Tokeitai as comfort women.[248]

One of the last eugenic measures of the Shwa regime was taken by the Higashikuni government. On 19 August 1945, the Home Ministry ordered local government offices to establish a prostitution service for Allied soldiers to preserve the "purity" of the "Japanese race". The official declaration stated that: "Through the sacrifice of thousands of "Okichis" of the Shwa era, we shall construct a dike to hold back the mad frenzy of the occupation troops and cultivate and preserve the purity of our race long into the future...."[249]

According to Peter Schrijvers in "The GI War against Japan: American Soldiers in Asia and the Pacific during World War II",[250] rape "reflects a burning need to establish total dominance of the enemy". According to Xavier Guillaume, US soldiers' rape of Japanese women was "general practice". Schrijvers states regarding rapes on Okinawa that "The estimate of one Okinawan historian for the entire three-month period of the campaign exceeds 10,000. A figure that does not seem unlikely when one realizes that during the first 10 days of the occupation of Japan there were 1,336 reported cases of rape of Japanese women by American soldiers in Kanagawa prefecture alone".[250]

However, despite being told by the Japanese military that they would suffer rape, torture and murder at the hands of the Americans, Japanese civilians "were often surprised at the comparatively humane treatment they received from the American enemy."[251][252] According to Islands of Discontent: Okinawan Responses to Japanese and American Power by Mark Selden, the Americans "did not pursue a policy of torture, rape, and murder of civilians as Japanese military officials had warned."[253]

Japanese society, with its ideology of homogeneity, has traditionally been intolerant of ethnic and other differences.[254] Men or women of mixed ancestry, foreigners, and members of minority groups face discrimination in a variety of forms. In 2005, a United Nations report expressed concerns about racism in Japan and that government recognition of the depth of the problem was not realistic.[255][256] In 2005, Japanese Minister Taro Aso called Japan a "one race" nation.[257]

The Japanese public was thus astounded by the sight of some 45,000 so-called "pan pan girls" (prostitutes) fraternizing with American soldiers during the occupation.[258] In 1946, the 200 wives of U.S. officers landing in Japan to visit their husbands also had a similar impact when many of these reunited couples were seen walking hand in hand and kissing in public.[259] Both prostitution and marks of affection had been hidden from the public until then, and this "democratization of eroticism" was a source of surprise, curiosity, and even envy. The occupation set new relationship models for Japanese men and women: the practice of modern "dating" spread, and activities such as dancing, movies, and coffee were not limited to "pan pan girls" and American troops anymore, and became popular among young Japanese couples.[260]

Korea[edit]
Inter-ethnic marriage in Korea dates back to the arrival of Muslims in Korea during the Middle Ages, when Persian and Turkic navigators, traders and slaves settled in Korea and married local Korean people. Some assimilation into Buddhism and Shamanism eventually took place, owing to Korea's geographical isolation from the Muslim world.[261]

There are several Korean clans that are descended from such intermarriages. For example, the Deoksu Jang clan, claiming some 30,000 Korean members, views Jang Sunnyong, a Central Asian who married a Korean female, as their ancestor.[262] Another clan, Gyeongju Seol, claiming at least 2,000 members in Korea, view a Central Asian (probably an Uyghur) named Seol Son as their ancestor.[263][264]

There are even cases of Korean kings marrying princesses from abroad. For example, the Korean text Samguk Yusa about the Gaya kingdom (it was absorbed by the kingdom of Silla later), indicate that in 48 AD, King Kim Suro of Gaya (the progenitor of the Gimhae Kim clan) took a princess (Princess Heo) from the "Ayuta nation" (which is the Korean name for the city of Ayodhya in North India) as his bride and queen. Princess Heo belonged to the Mishra royal family of Ayodhya. According to the Samguk Yusa, the princess had a dream about a heavenly fair handsome king from a far away land who was awaiting heaven's anointed ride. After Princess Heo had the dream, she asked her parents, the king and queen of Ayodhya, for permission to set out and seek the foreign prince, which the king and queen urged with the belief that God orchestrated the whole fate. That king was no other than King Kim Suro of the Korean Gaya kingdom.

6,423 Korean women married US military personnel as war brides during and immediately after the Korean War. The average number of Korean women marrying US military personnel each year was about 1,500 per year in the 1960s and 2,300 per year in the 1970s.[265] Since the beginning of the Korean War in 1950, nearly 100,000 Korean women have immigrated to the United States as the wives of American soldiers. Based on extensive oral interviews and archival research, Beyond the Shadow of the Camptowns tells the stories of these women, from their presumed association with U.S. military camptowns and prostitution to their struggles within the intercultural families they create in the United States.[266]

International marriages now make up 13% of all marriages in South Korea. Most of these marriages are unions between a Korean male and a foreign female[267] usually from China, Japan, Vietnam, the Philippines, United States, Mongolia, Thailand, or Russia. On the other hand, Korean females have married foreign males from Japan, China, the United States, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Philippines, and Nepal. Between 1990 and 2005, there have been 159,942 Korean males and 80,813 Korean females married to foreigners.[268][269]

South Korea is among the world's most ethnically homogeneous nations.[270] Koreans have traditionally valued an unmixed blood as the most important feature of Korean identity. The term "Kosian", referring to someone who has a Korean father and a non-Korean mother, is considered offensive by some who prefer to identify themselves or their children as Korean.[271][272] Moreover, the Korean office of Amnesty International has claimed that the word "Kosian" represents racial discrimination.[273][274] Kosian children, like those of other mixed-race backgrounds in Korea, often face discrimination.[275] There are an estimated 35,000 mixed-raced South Koreans, most of them half Caucasian, according to the Pearl Buck Foundation. Discrimination is far worse against those who have African American fathers.[276]

Vietnam[edit]
Main articles: B?i ??i and Women in Vietnam  European rule
Much of the business conducted with foreign men in Southeast Asia was done by the local women, who engaged in both sexual and mercantile intercourse with foreign male traders. A Portuguese and Malay speaking Vietnamese woman who lived in Macao for an extensive period of time was the person who interpreted for the first diplomatic meeting between Cochin-China and a Dutch delegation, she served as an interpreter for three decades in the Cochin-China court with an old woman who had been married to three husbands, one Vietnamese and two Portuguese.[277][278][279] The cosmopolitan exchange was facilitated by the marriage of Vietnamese women to Portuguese merchants. Those Vietnamese woman were married to Portuguese men and lived in Macao which was how they became fluent in Malay and Portuguese.[280]

Alexander Hamilton said that "The Tonquiners used to be very desirous of having a brood of Europeans in their country, for which reason the greatest nobles thought it no shame or disgrace to marry their daughters to English and Dutch seamen, for the time they were to stay in Tonquin, and often presented their sons-in-law pretty handsomely at their departure, especially if they left their wives with child; but adultery was dangerous to the husband, for they are well versed in the art of poisoning."[281]

Malaysia and Singapore[edit]
In West Malaysia and Singapore, the majority of inter-ethnic marriages are between Chinese and Indians. The offspring of such marriages are informally known as "Chindian", although the Malaysian government only classifies them by their father's ethnicity. As the majority of these intermarriages usually involve an Indian groom and Chinese bride, the majority of Chindians in Malaysia are usually classified as "Indian" by the Malaysian government. As for the Malays, who are predominantly Muslim, legal restrictions in Malaysia make it uncommon for them to intermarry with either the Indians, who are predominantly Hindu, or the Chinese, who are predominantly Buddhist and Taoist.[282] Non-Muslims are required to convert to Islam in order to marry Muslims. However, this has not entirely stopped intermarriage between the Malays and the Chinese and Indians. The Muslim Chinese community is small and has only a negligible impact on the socio-economy and demography of the region.

It is common for Arabs in Singapore and Malaysia to take local Malay and Jawi Peranakan wives, due to a common Islamic faith.[114] The Chitty people, in Singapore and the Malacca state of Malaysia, are a Tamil people with considerable Malay descent, which was due to the first Tamil settlers taking local wives, since they did not bring along any of their own women with them. According to government statistics, the population of Singapore as of September 2007 was 4.68 million, of whom multiracial people, including Chindians and Eurasians, formed 2.4%.

In the East Malaysian states of Sabah and Sarawak, there have been many incidents of intermarriage between Chinese and native tribes such as the Murut and Dusun in Sabah, and the Iban and Bisaya in Sarawak. This phenomenon has resulted in a potpourri of cultures in both states where many people claiming to be of native descent have some Chinese blood in them, and many Chinese have native blood in them. The offspring of these mixed marriages are called 'Sino-(name of tribe)', e.g. Sino-Dusun. Normally, if the father is Chinese, the offspring will adopt Chinese culture and if the father is native then native culture will be adopted, but this is not always the case. These Sino-natives are usually fluent in Malay and English. A smaller number are able to speak Chinese dialects and Mandarin, especially those who have received education in vernacular Chinese schools.

Burma[edit]
Burmese Muslims are the descendants of Bengalis, Indian Muslims, Arabs, Persians, Turks, Pathans, Chinese Muslims and Malays who settled and intermarried with the local Burmese population and other Burmese ethnic groups such as the Rakhine, Shan, Karen, and Mon.[283][284]

The oldest Muslim group in Burma (Myanmar) are the Rohingya people, who some believe are descended from Bengalis who intermarried with the native females in the Rakhine State after the 7th century, but this is just a theory. When Burma was ruled by the British India administration, millions of Indians, mostly Muslim, migrated there. The small population of mixed descendants of Indian males and local Burmese females are called "Zerbadees", often in a pejorative sense implying mixed race. The Panthays, a group of Chinese Muslims descended from West Asians and Central Asians, migrated from China and also intermarried with local Burmese females.[213]

In addition, Burma has an estimated 52,000 Anglo-Burmese people, descended from British and Burmese people. Anglo-Burmese people frequently intermarried with Anglo-Indian immigrants, who eventually assimilated into the Anglo-Burmese community.

The All India Digest said that when a Chinese man married a Burmese woman, it must be proved that he adopted and followed the Burmese form of Buddhism before assuming that he followed Burmese Buddhism and that since many Chinese in Burma adopted Burmese names, adoption of a Burmese name was not proof enough for his adopting Burmese Buddhism, therefore, Chinese Buddhist customary law must be followed in cases involving.[285]

Philippines[edit]

A Filipina bride and Nigerian groom walk down the aisle.
Historically, admixture has been an ever present and pervasive phenomenon in the Philippines. The Philippines were originally settled by Australoid peoples called Negritos (different from other australoid groups) which now form the country's aboriginal community. Some admixture may have occurred between this earlier group and the mainstream Malayo-Polynesian population.[286]

A considerable number of the population in the town of Cainta, Rizal, are descended from Indian soldiers who mutinied against the British Indian Army when the British briefly occupied the Philippines in 1762C63. These Indian soldiers, called Sepoy, settled in towns and intermarried with native women. Cainta residents of Indian descent are very visible today, particularly in Barrio Dayap near Brgy. Sto Ni?o.

There has been a Chinese presence in the Philippines since the 9th century. However, large-scale migrations of Chinese to the Philippines only started during the Spanish colonial era, when the world market was opened to the Philippines. It is estimated that among Filipinos, 10%C20% have some Chinese ancestry and 1.5% are "full-blooded" Chinese.[287]

According to the American anthropologist Dr. H. Otley Beyer, the ancestry of Filipinos is 2% Arab. This dates back to when Arab traders intermarried with the local Malay Filipina female populations during the pre-Spanish history of the Philippines.[114] Major Arab migration to the Philippines coincided with the spread of Islam in the region. Filipino-Muslim royal families from the Sultanate of Sulu and the Sultanate of Maguindanao claim Arab descent even going as far as claiming direct lineage from Muhammad.[288] Such intermarriage mostly took place around the Mindanao island area, but the arrival of Spanish Conquistadors to the Philippines abruptly halted the spread of Islam further north into the Philippines. Intermarriage with Spanish people later became more prevalent after the Philippines was colonized by the Spanish Empire.

When the Spanish colonized the Philippines, a significant portion of the Filipino population mixed with the Spanish. When the United States took the Philippines from Spain during the SpanishCAmerican War, much intermixing of Americans, both white and black, took place on the island of Luzon where the US had a Naval Base and Air Force Base, even after the USA gave the Philippines independence after World War II. First children and descendants of male Filipino population with Spanish surnames who intermarried with white American female population may be considered Spanish mestizos. The descendants of Filipinos and Europeans are today known as mestizos, following the term used in other former Spanish colonies.

Much mixing with the Japanese also took place due to the war rapes of Filipina women during World War II. Today there is an increasing number of Japanese men marrying Filipina woman and fathering children by them whose family remain behind in the Philippines and are financially supported by their Japanese fathers who make regular visits to the Philippines. Today mixed-race marriages have a mixed perception in the Philippines. Most urban centers like Manila and Cebu are more willing to accept interracial marriages than rural areas.

Europe[edit]
Germany[edit]
Main articles: Anti-miscegenation laws  Nazi Germany, and Rassenschande

Poster of the Nazi paper Der Strmer (1935)

Chart used to explain the Nuremberg race laws

1940 poster in German and Polish describing "Obligations of Polish workers in Germany" including death sentence to every man and woman from Poland for sex with a German.
During the years following World War I, the French Army occupied the Rhineland, utilising African soldiers amongst their forces. Their children were known as "Rhineland Bastards".

Beginning in 1933, the mainstream Nazi anti-Semitism considered the Jews as being a group of people bound by close, so-called genetic (blood) ties, to form a unit, which one could not join or secede from. The influence of Jews had been declared to have a detrimental impact on Germany, in order to justify the discriminations and persecutions of Jews. To be spared from those, one had to prove one's affiliation with the group of the Aryan race, as conceived by the Nazis.

It was paradoxical that neither genetic tests nor allegedly racial outward features in one's physiognomy determined one's affiliation, although the Nazis talked a lot about physiognomy, but only the records of the religious affiliations of one's grandparents decided it. However, while earlier the grandparents had still been able to choose their religion, their grandchildren in the Nazi era were compulsorily categorised as Jews, thus non-Aryans, if three or four grandparents had been enrolled as members of a Jewish congregation, regardless of whether the persecuted themselves were Jews according to the Halachah (roughly meaning: Jewish by birth from a Jewish mother or by conversion), apostates, irreligionists or Christians.

The Nuremberg Laws of 1935 forbade persons racially regarded as so-called Aryans and non-Aryans to marry; this included all marriages where at least one partner was a German citizen. Non-Aryans comprised mostly Jewish Germans and Gentile Germans of Jewish descent. The official definition of "Aryan" classified all non-Jewish Europeans as Aryans,[289] sexual relations between Aryans and non-Aryans now became punishable as Rassenschande (race defilement).[290]

Eventually childrenwhenever bornwithin a mixed marriage, as well as children from extramarital mixed relationships born until 31 July 1936, were discriminated against as Mischlinge or crossbreed. However, children later born to mixed parents, not yet married as at the passing of the Nuremberg Laws, were to be discriminated against as Geltungsjuden, regardless of whether the parents had meanwhile married abroad or remained unmarried. Eventually children who were enrolled in a Jewish congregation were also subject to discrimination as Geltungsjuden.

Geltungsjuden were subjected to varying degrees of forced labour in 1940, partly ordered for all Jewish-classified spouses, either only for Jewish-classified husbands or only exempting Jewish-classified wives taking care of minor children. No documents indicate the exemption of a mixed marriage and especially of its Jewish-classified spouse from some persecutions.[291]

Systematic deportations of Jewish Germans and Gentile Germans of Jewish descent started on 18 October 1941.[292] German Jews and German Gentiles of Jewish descent living in mixed marriages were in fact mostly spared from deportation.[293] In the event that a mixed marriage ended by the death of the so-called Aryan spouse or the divorce of the Jewish-classified spouse, the Jewish-classified spouse residing within Germany was usually deported soon after unless the couple still had minor children not counted as Geltungsjuden.[294]

In March 1943 an attempt to deport the Berlin-based Jews and Gentiles of Jewish descent, living in non-privileged mixed marriages, failed due to public protest by their in-laws of so-called Aryan kinship (see Rosenstra?e protest). Also the Aryan-classified husbands and Mischling-classified children (starting at the age of 16) from mixed marriages were taken by the Organisation Todt for forced labour, starting in autumn 1944.

A last attempt, undertaken in February/March 1945, ended because the extermination camps were already liberated. However, 2,600 from all over the Reich were deported to Theresienstadt, of whom most survived the last months until their liberation.[295]

After the war began, the race defilement law was extended to include all foreigners.[296] The Gestapo harshly persecuted sexual relations between Germans and workers from Eastern Europe on the grounds of "risk for the racial integrity of the German nation".[296] A decree dated on 7 December 1942 stated any "unauthorized sexual intercourse" would result in the death penalty.[297] Foreign workers brought to Nazi Germany were treated as a danger to German blood.[298] Polish workers and Eastern Workers who had sexual relations with a German were punished with the death penalty.[299] During the war, hundreds of Polish, Belarusian, Ukrainian and Russian men were executed for their relations with German women.[300][301]


Boris Becker with Barbara Feltus in 1992
With the defeat of Nazi Germany in 1945 the laws banning so-called mixed marriages were lifted again. If couples who had already lived together during the Nazi era had remained unmarried due to the legal restrictions then got married after the war, their date of marriage was legally retroactively backdated if they wished it to the date they formed a couple.[302] Even if one spouse was already dead, the marriage could be retroactively recognised. In the West German Federal Republic of Germany 1,823 couples applied for recognition, which was granted in 1,255 cases.

Hungary[edit]
The Hungarians are thought to have originated in an ancient Finno-Ugric population that originally inhabited the forested area between the Volga River and the Ural Mountains.[303] At the time of the Magyar migration in the 10th century, the present-day Hungary was inhabited by Slavs, numbering about 200,000,[304] who were either assimilated or enslaved by the Magyars.[304]

During the Russian campaign in the 13th century, the Mongols drove some 40,000 Cuman families, a nomadic tribe, west of the Carpathian Mountains.[305] The Iranian Jassic people came to Hungary together with the Cumans after they were defeated by the Mongols. Over the centuries they were fully assimilated into the Hungarian population.[306]

Starting in 1938, Hungary under Mikls Horthy passed a series of anti-Jewish measures in emulation of Germany's Nuremberg Laws. The first, promulgated on May 29, 1938, restricted the number of Jews in each commercial enterprise, in the press, among physicians, engineers and lawyers to twenty percent. The second anti-Jewish law (May 5, 1939), for the first time, defined Jews racially: people with 2, 3 or 4 Jewish-born grandparents were declared Jewish. Their employment in government at any level was forbidden, they could not be editors at newspapers, their numbers were restricted to six per cent among theater and movie actors, physicians, lawyers and engineers. Private companies were forbidden to employ more than 12% Jews. 250,000 Hungarian Jews lost their income. Most of them lost their right to vote as well: before the second Jewish law, about 31% of the Jewish population of Borsod county (Miskolc excluded), 2496 people had this right. At the next elections, less than a month after this new anti-Jewish legislation, only 38 privileged Jews could vote.[307]

Iberian Peninsula[edit]

Hadith Bayad wa Riyad (12th century) was an Arabic love story about an Andalusian female and a foreign Damascene male.
In ancient history, the Iberian Peninsula was frequently invaded by foreigners who intermarried with the native population. One of the earliest foreign groups to arrive in the region were the Indo-European Celts who intermarried with the pre-Indo-European Iberians in prehistoric Iberia. They were later followed by the Semitic Phoenicians and Carthaginians and the Indo-European Romans who intermarried with the pre-Roman peoples of the Iberian Peninsula during Classical Antiquity.

They were in turn followed by the Germanic Visigoths, Suebi and Vandals and the Iranian Sarmatians and Alans who also intermarried with the local population in Hispania during late Antiquity. In the 6th century, the region was reconquered by the Byzantine Empire (Eastern Roman Empire), when Byzantine Greeks also settled there, before the region was lost again to the Visigothic Kingdom less than a century later.

The offspring of marriages between Arabs and non-Arabs in Iberia (Berbers or local Iberians) were known as Muladi or Muwallad, an Arabic term still used in the modern Arab world to refer to people with Arab fathers and non-Arab mothers.[308] Some sources consider this term the origin for the Spanish word Mulatto.[309][310] However, the Real Academia Espa?ola does not endorse such etymology.[311] This is because the term was mainly used during the time period of al-Andalus to refer to local Iberians (Christians and pagans) who converted to Islam or whose ancestors had converted. An example is the Banu Qasi, a Muslim dynasty of Basque origin. In addition, many Muladi were also descended from Saqaliba (Slavic) slaves taken from Eastern Europe via the Arab slave trade. Collectively, Christian Europeans named all the Muslims of Iberia, "Moors", regardless of ethnic origin.

After the Reconquista, which was completed in 1492, most of the Moors were forced to either flee to Islamic territories or convert to Christianity. The ones who converted to Christianity were known as Moriscoes, and they were often persecuted by the Spanish Inquisition as suspects of heresy on the basis of the Limpieza de sangre ("Cleanliness of blood") doctrine, under which anti-miscegenation laws were implemented in the Iberian Peninsula.[312]

Anyone whose ancestors had miscegenated with the Moors or Jews were suspected of secretly practicing Islam or Judaism, so were often particularly monitored by the Inquisition. The claim to universal hidalgua (lowest nobility) of the Basques was justified by erudites like Manuel de Larramendi (1690C1766)[313] because the Arab invasion had not reached the Basque territories, so it was believed that Basques had maintained their original purity, while the rest of Spain was suspect of miscegenation. Hidalgua helped many Basques to official positions in the administration.[314] In December 2008, a genetic study of the current population of the Iberian Peninsula, published in the American Journal of Human Genetics, estimated that about 10% have North African ancestors and 20% have Sephardi Jews as ancestors. Since there is no direct link between genetic makeup and religious affiliation, however, it is difficult to draw direct conclusions between their findings and forced or voluntary conversion.[315] Nevertheless, the Sephardic result is in contradiction[316][317][318][319][320] or not replicated in all the body of genetic studies done in Iberia and has been later questioned by the authors themselves[315][321][322][323] and by Stephen Oppenheimer who estimates that much earlier migrations, 5000 to 10,000 years ago from the Eastern Mediterranean might also have accounted for the Sephardic estimates: "They are really assuming that they are looking at his migration of Jewish immigrants, but the same lineages could have been introduced in the Neolithic".[324] The rest of genetic studies done in Spain estimate the North African contribution ranging from 2.5/3.4%[citation needed] to 7.7%.[325]

Italian Peninsula[edit]

"Othello and Desdemona", a painting by Alexandre-Marie Colin in 1829
As was the case in other areas occupied by Muslims, it was acceptable in Islamic marital law for a Muslim male to marry Christian and Jewish females in southern Italy when under Islamic rule - namely, the Emirate of Sicily, and, of least importance, the short-lived Emirate of Bari between the 8th and 11th centuries. In this case, most intermarriages were between Arab and Berber males from North Africa and the local Greek, Roman and Italian females. Such intermarriages were particularly common in the Emirate of Sicily, where one writer visiting the place in the 970s expressed shock at how common it was in rural areas.[326] After the Norman conquest of southern Italy, all Muslim citizens (whether foreign, native or mixed) of the Kingdom of Sicily were known as "Moors". After a brief period when the Arab-Norman culture had flourished under the reign of Roger II of Sicily, later rulers forced the Moors to either convert to Christianity or be expelled from the kingdom.

In Malta, Arabs and Italians from neighbouring Sicily and Calabria intermarried with the local inhabitants,[327] who were descended from Phoenicians, Greeks, Romans and Vandals. The Maltese people are descended from such unions, and the Maltese language is descended from Siculo-Arabic.

At times, the Italian city-states also played an active role in the Arab slave trade, where Moorish and Italian traders occasionally exchanged slaves.

During World War II, France's Moroccan troops known as Goumiers committed war rapes in Italy after the Battle of Monte Cassino[328] and in Germany. In Italy, victims of the mass rape committed after the Battle of Monte Cassino by Goumiers are known as Marocchinate. According to Italian sources, more than 7,000 Italian civilians, including women and children, were raped by Goumiers.[329]


An artistic depiction of Ruthenian slave girl Roxelana with Suleiman the Magnificent, by German painter Anton Hickel (1780).
Russia[edit]
See also: Afro-Russian and Ethnic Chinese in Russia
Already in the 17th century there were many marriages between Russian settlers and aborigines of Siberia. The Metis Foundation estimates that there are about 40,000 mixed-race Russians.[330]

Many Chinese men, even those who had left wives and children behind in China, married local women in the 1920s, especially those women who had been widowed during the wars and upheavals of the previous decade. Their mixed race children tended to be given Russian forenames; some retained their fathers' Chinese surnames, while others took on Russian surnames, and a large proportion also invented new surnames using their father's entire family name and given name as the new surname.

Southeastern and Eastern Europe[edit]
Vikings explored and eventually settled in territories in Slavic-dominated areas of Eastern Europe. By 950 AD these settlements were largely Slavicized through intermarriage with the local population. Eastern Europe was also an important source for the Arab slave trade at the time, when Saqaliba (Slavic) slaves were taken to the Arab World, where the women and girls often served in harems, some of whom married their Arab masters. When the Mongol Empire annexed much of Eastern Europe in the 13th century, the Mongols also intermarried with the local population and often engaged in war rape during the Mongol invasion of Europe.

Turkey[edit]

Imaginary scene from the sultan's harem
In the 11th century, the Byzantine territory of Anatolia was conquered by the Seljuq Turks, who came from Turkestan in Central Asia. Their Ottoman Turkish descendants went on to annex the Balkans and much of Eastern Europe in the 15th and 16th centuries. Due to Islamic marital law allowing a Muslim male to marry Christian and Jewish females, it was common in the Ottoman Empire for Turkish males to intermarry with European females. For example, various sultans of the Ottoman Dynasty often had Greek (R?m), Slavic (Saqaliba), Venetian, Northcaucasian and French wives.

In the Ottoman Empire, in addition to the Ottoman elites often taking large numbers of European wives and concubines (see Southeastern and Eastern Europe section), there were also opportunities for the reverse, when the empire recruited young Christian boys (Europeans and Christian Arabs) to become the elite troops of the Turkish Empire, the Janissaries. These Janissaries were stationed throughout the Turkish empire including the Middle-East and North Africa leading to inter-ethnic relationships between European men and women from the Middle East and North Africa.

The concubines of the Ottoman Sultan consisted chiefly of purchased slaves. Because Islamic law forbade Muslims to enslave fellow Muslims, the Sultan's concubines were generally of Christian origin. The mother of a Sultan, though technically a slave, received the extremely powerful title of Valide Sultan, and at times became effective ruler of the Empire (see Sultanate of women). One notable example was K?sem Sultan, daughter of a Greek Christian priest, who dominated the Ottoman Empire during the early decades of the 17th century.[331] Another notable example was Roxelana, the favourite wife of Suleiman the Magnificent.

Some of these European wives exerted great influence upon the empire as Valide Sultan ("Mother-Sultan"), some famous examples including Roxelana, a Ukrainian harem slave who later became Suleiman the Magnificent's favourite wife, and Nak?idil Sultan, wife of Abdul Hamid I, who according to legend may have been Aime du Buc de Rivry, cousin of French Empress Josephine. Due to the common occurrence of such intermarriages in the Ottoman Empire, they have had a significant impact on the ethnic makeup of the modern Turkish population in Turkey, which now differs from that of the Turkic population in Central Asia.[332] In addition to intermarriage, the large harems of Ottoman sultans often consisted almost entirely of female concubines who were of Christian European origin.[333] Sultan Ibrahim the Mad, Ottoman ruler from 1640 to 1648, is said to have drowned 280 concubines of his harem in the Bosphorus.[334] At least one of his concubines, Turhan Hatice, Ukrainian girl captured during one of the raids by Tatars and sold into slavery, survived his reign.

United Kingdom[edit]
See also: British Mixed-Race
Intermarriage with non-European populations began as early as the Agricultural Revolution. According to the Daily Mail (London) researchers have claimed to have found that a majority of British males have DNA that can be traced back to Middle Eastern male farmers (from around present-day Iraq and Syria) who around 8000 BC began migrating to Britain, introducing agriculture to the island, and settling down with local British females.[335]


Seal with ex-wife Heidi Klum.
In the late 15th century, the Romani people, who have Indian origins, arrived in Britain. The Romani in Britain intermarried with the local population and became known to the Romani as the Romanichal. In India, the British East India Company and other European soldiers intermarried with Indian women. The offspring of these mixed marriages between the British and Indians were known as Anglo-Indians.[336] Indian wives sometimes accompanied their husbands back to Britain.[337] The British East India Company brought many South Asian lascars to Britain, where many settled down with local white British wives, due to a lack of Asian women in Britain at the time.[338]

Inter-ethnic relationships have become increasingly accepted over the last several decades. As of 2001, 2% of all marriages in Britain are inter-ethnic. Despite having a much lower non-white population (9%), mixed marriages in the United Kingdom are as common as in the United States, although America has many fewer specific definitions of race (four racial definitions as opposed to the United Kingdom's 86).[339] As of 2005, it is estimated that nearly half of British-born African-Caribbean males, a third of British-born African-Caribbean females, and a fifth of Indian and African males, have white partners.[340] As of 2009, one in 10 children in the UK lives in a mixed-race or mixed-ethnicity family (families headed by one white-British parent and one white parent not of British origin are included in the figure) and two out of five Chinese women have partners of a different race.[341] One out of five Chinese men have partners of a different race. According to the UK 2001 census, black British males were around 50% more likely than black females to marry outside their race. British Chinese women (30%) were twice as likely as their male counterparts (15%) to marry someone from a different ethnic group.

Middle East[edit]

The Slave Market, painting by Jean-Lon Gr?me, c. 1884
A Stanford team found the greatest diversity outside Africa among people living in the wide crescent of land stretching from the eastern shore of the Mediterranean to northern India. Not only was the region among the first colonized by the African migrants, they theorize, but the large number of European and East Asian genes among the population indicates that it has long been a human highway, with large numbers of migrants from both directions conquering, trading and generally reproducing along its entire length. The same team also found out that the Bedouin nomads of the Middle East actually have some similarities to Europeans and South Asians[citation needed]

Inter-ethnic sexual slavery was common during the Arab slave trade throughout the Middle Ages and early modern period, when women and girls captured from non-Arab lands often ended up as sexual slaves in the harems of the Arab World.[342] Most of these slaves came from places such as Sub-Saharan Africa (mainly Zanj), South Asia (Hindus), the North Caucasus (mainly Circassians),[343] Central Asia (mainly Turks), and Central and Eastern Europe (mainly Saqaliba).[344] The Barbary pirates also captured 1,250,000 slaves from Western Europe and North America between the 16th and 19th centuries.[345][346] It was also common for Arab conquerors, traders and explorers to marry local females in the lands they conquered or traded with, in various parts of Africa, Asia (see Asia section) and Europe (see Europe section).

Inter-ethnic relationships were generally accepted in Arabic society and formed a fairly common theme in medieval Arabic literature and Persian literature. For example, the Persian poet Nizami, who had himself married his Kipchak slave girl, wrote The Seven Beauties (1196). Its frame story involves a Persian prince marrying seven foreign princesses, including Byzantine, Chinese, Indian, Khwarezmian, Maghrebian, Slavic and Tartar princesses. Hadith Bayad wa Riyad, a 12th-century Arabic tale from Al-Andalus, was a love story involving an Iberian girl and a Damascene man. The One Thousand and One Nights tale of "The Man of Al-Yaman and His Six Slave-Girls" involves a Yemeni man's relationship with foreign slave girls, four of which are white, black, brown and yellow.[347] Another One Thousand and One Nights tale, "The Ebony Horse", involves the Prince of Persia, Qamar al-Aqmar, rescuing his lover, the Princess of Sana'a, from the Byzantine Emperor who also wishes to marry her.[348]

One study found that some Arabic-speaking populationsPalestinians, Jordanians, Syrians, Iraqis, and Bedouinshave what appears to be substantial mtDNA gene flow from sub-Saharan Africa, amounting to 10C15% of lineages within the past three millennia.[349][350] In the case of Yemenites, the average is higher at 35%.[349]


A slave market in Khartoum, Sudan, c. 1876
In 1814, Swiss explorer Johann Burckhardt wrote of his travels in Egypt and Nubia, where he saw the practice of slave trading:

I frequently witnessed scenes of the most shameless indecency, which the traders, who were the principal actors, only laughed at. I may venture to state, that very few female slaves who have passed their tenth year, reach Egypt or Arabia in a state of virginity.[351]

A genetic anthropological study known as The Genographic Project has found what is believed to be faint genetic traces left by medieval Crusaders in the Middle East. The team has uncovered a specific DNA signature in Syria, Lebanon, Palestine and Jordan that is probably linked to the 7th and 8th Christian crusades. The Crusaders originated from European kingdoms, mostly France, England and the Holy Roman Empire.[352]

Inter-ethnic sexual slavery still continues today in a smaller form in the Arab states of the Persian Gulf, where women and children are trafficked from the post-Soviet states, Eastern Europe, Far East, Africa, South Asia and other parts of the Middle East.[353][354][355]

Israel[edit]
The modern State of Israel was established as a nation-state for the Jewish people. The Jewish identity contains elements of religion (Judaism), ethnicity, and a sense of a common lineage.

Israeli law concerns itself with miscegenation based on Jewish ethnicity, not miscegenation based on race. Therefore, there are no restrictions on interracial marriages between Jews of different Jewish ethnic divisions, or between other co-religionists of different races, although social stigma may still exist. Furthermore, there is no legal impediment to inter-ethnic or inter-religious marriage per se, only that the state does not recognize them when they are solemnized within Israel.

Thus in Israel, all marriages must be approved by religious authorities, while civil marriages are legally recognized if performed abroad. Rules governing marriage are based on strict religious guidelines of each religion. Under Israeli law, authority over all issues related to Judaism in Israel, including marriage, falls under the Chief Rabbinate of Israel, which is Orthodox. Orthodox Judaism is the only form of Judaism recognized by the state, and marriages performed in Israel by non-Orthodox Rabbis are not recognized.

The Rabbinate prohibits marriage in Israel of halakhic Jews (i.e. people born to a Jewish mother or Jewish by conversion), whether they are Orthodox Jews or not, to partners who are non-Jewish or who are of Jewish descent that runs through the paternal line (i.e. not Jewish according to halakha), unless they undergo a formal conversion to Judaism. As a result, in the state of Israel, people of differing religious traditions cannot legally marry someone in another religion and multi-faith couples must leave the country to get married.

The only other option in Israel for the marriage of a halakhic Jew (Orthodox or not) to a non-Jew, or for that matter, a Christian to a non-Christian or Muslim to a non-Muslim, is for one partner to formally convert to the other's religion, be it to Orthodox Judaism, a Christian denomination or a denomination of Islam. As for persons with patrilineal Jewish descent (i.e. not recognized as Jewish according to halakha) who wish to marry a halakhic Jew (i.e., born to a Jewish mother or is Jewish by Orthodox conversion) who is Orthodox or otherwise, is also required to formally convert to Orthodox Judaism or they cannot legally marry.

According to a Haaretz article "Justice Ministry drafts civil marriage law for refuseniks" 300,000 people, or 150,000 couples, are affected by marriage restrictions based on the partners' disparate religious traditions or non-halakhic Jewish status.[356]

Many Israeli Jews oppose mixed relationships between Jews and non-Jews, although it should be noted that this is not so much an Israeli phenomenon as a Jewish one, through fear of assimilation.[citation needed] There may also be an element in Israel that mixed relationships with Arabs represent an additional danger, politically as well as religiously: a 2007 opinion survey found that more than half of Israeli Jews believed intermarriage is equivalent to "national treason". A poll in 2014 found that three quarters of Israeli Jews and two thirds of Israeli Arabs would not marry someone from a different religion. Inter-faith relationships were opposed by 95 percent of Haredi Jews, 88 percent of traditional and religious Jews and 64 percent of secular Jews.[357]

A group of 35 Jewish men, known as "Fire for Judaism", in Pisgat Ze'ev have started patrolling the town in an effort to stop Jewish women from dating Arab men. The municipality of Petah Tikva has also announced an initiative to prevent interracial relationships, providing a telephone hotline for friends and family to "inform" on Jewish girls who date Arab men as well as psychologists to provide counselling. The town of Kiryat Gat launched a school programme in schools to warn Jewish girls against dating local Bedouin men.[358][359]

In February 2010 Maariv has reported that the Tel Aviv municipality has instituted an official, government-sponsored "counselling program" to discourage Jewish girls from dating and marrying Arab boys. The Times has also reported on a vigilante parents group policing the Jerusalem neighborhood of Pisgat Ze'ev to intimidate and discourage local Arab-Jewish couples. The Jewish anti-missionary group Yad L'achim has also performed paramilitary "rescue operations" of Jewish women from non-Jewish husbands and celebrates the "rescued women" on their website.[360]

In the 2014 the marriage of a Muslim groom and a bride who had converted from Judaism to Islam attracted attention when the wedding was protested by Lehava, an organisation opposing Jewish assimilation. An Israeli court allowed the protest to go ahead but ordered protesters to stay at least 200 metres away from the wedding venue in Rishon LeZion. In response a demonstration in support for the couple was also held.[361]

Oceania[edit]

German immigrant Hermann A. Widemann had a large family with his Hawaiian wife Mary Kaumana, 1886
Australia[edit]
Miscegenation was a deliberate policy of the Western Australian Protector of Aborigines, A. O. Neville, who hoped to "breed out" Aboriginal characteristics from the growing "half caste" population of Aborigines in Western Australia. As a result, he failed to prosecute cases where half caste girls were sexually abused or raped by European Australian, who sought an evening on "the black velvet". The children of such unions were often taken from their mothers and confined to "concentration camps" at Moore River and Carrolup, as a part of the policy known as Stolen Generations.[citation needed]

New Zealand[edit]
Miscegenation is a politically charged topic in New Zealand, although mixed marriages are very common and almost universally accepted. People who identify as Mori typically have ancestors ('tpuna'[362]) from at least two distinct ethnicities. Historically this has leant itself to the majority belief that "real" Mori were gradually disappearing from New Zealand and "one people" were forming.[363] This view held sway in New Zealand until the late 1960s and 70s, when a revival and re-establishment of Mori culture and tradition coincided with a rejection of the majority opinion.[364]

The belief that Mori were disappearing was partially founded on the reality of high and ongoing rates of intermarriage between Europeans and Mori before and since colonisation. During the revival of Mori culture and tradition this belief began to be challenged by redefining "Mori" as an ethnic identity as opposed to a racial category.[365] As a result, a person may have one European/Asian/Pacific parent and one Mori parent, but be considered no less "authentically Mori" than a descendent of two Mori.

Two-thirds of Mori births, half of Pacific births, and a third of white and Asian births belonged to more than one ethnic group.[366]

Portuguese colonies[edit]
See also: Orfas del Rei
According to Gilberto Freyre, a Brazilian sociologist, interracial marriage was commonplace in the Portuguese colonies, and was even supported by the court as a way to boost low populations and guarantee a successful and cohesive settlement. Thus, settlers often released African slaves to become their wives. The children were guaranteed full Portuguese citizenship, provided the parents were married. Some former Portuguese colonies have large mixed-race populations, for instance, Brazil, Cape Verde, Mozambique, Timor Leste, Macau and S?o Tom and Prncipe. In the case of Brazil, the influential "Indianist" novels of Jos de Alencar (O Guarany, Iracema, and Ubirajara) perhaps went farther than in the other colonies, advocating miscegenation in order to create a truly Brazilian race.[367] Mixed marriages between Portuguese and locals in former colonies were very common in all Portuguese colonies. Miscegenation was still common in Africa until the independence of the former Portuguese colonies in the mid-1970s.

Demographics of ethnoracial admixture[edit]
U.S.[edit]
According to the U.S. Census,[368] in 2000 there were 504,119 Asian-white marriages, 287,576 black-white marriages, and 31,271 Asian-black marriages. The black-white marriages increased from 65,000 in 1970 to 403,000 in 2006,[369] and 558,000 in 2010,[370] according to Census Bureau figures.[371]


New Jersey, 2008
In the United States, rates of interracial cohabitation are significantly higher than those of marriage. Although only 7% of married African American men have Caucasian American wives, 13% of cohabitating African American men have Caucasian American partners. 25% of married Asian American women have Caucasian spouses, but 45% of cohabitating Asian American women are with Caucasian American men. Of cohabiting Asian men, slightly over 37% of Asian men have white female partners over 10% married White American women.[50][372] Asian American women and Asian American men who live with a white partner, 40 and 27 percent, respectively (Le, 2006b). In 2008, of new marriages including an Asian man, 80% were to an Asian spouse and 14% to a White spouse; of new marriages involving an Asian woman, 61% were to an Asian spouse and 31% to a White spouse.[373] Almost 30% of Asians and Latinos outmarry, with 86.8 and 90% of these, respectively, being to a white person.[374] According to Karyn Langhorne Folan, "...although the most recent census available reported that 70% of African American women are single, African American women have the greatest resistance to marrying 'out' of the race."[375]

One survey revealed that 19% of black males had engaged in sexual activity with white women.[376] A Gallup poll on interracial dating in June 2006 found 75% of Americans approving of a white man dating a black woman, and 71% approving of a black man dating a white woman. Among people between the ages of 18 and 29, the poll found that 95% approved of blacks and whites dating, and about 60% said they had dated someone of a different race.[377] 69% of Hispanics, 52% of blacks, and 45% of whites said they have dated someone of another race or ethnic group.[378] In 1980, just 17% of all respondents said they had dated someone from a different racial background.[379]


NAACP President Benjamin Jealous is the son of a white father and a black mother
However, according to a study from the University of California at Berkeley, using data from over 1 million profiles of singles from online dating websites, whites were far more reluctant to date outside their race than non-whites. The study found that over 80% of whites, including whites who stated no racial preference, contacted other whites, whereas about 3% of whites contacted blacks, a result that held for younger and older participants. Only 5% of whites responded to inquiries from blacks. Black participants were ten times more likely to contact whites than whites were to contact blacks, however black participants sent inquiries to other blacks more often than otherwise.[380][381]

Interracial marriage is still relatively uncommon, despite the increasing rate. In 2010, 15% of new marriages were interracial, and of those only 9% of Whites married outside of their race. However, this takes into account inter ethnic marriages, this meaning it counts white Hispanics marrying non-Hispanic whites as interracial marriages, despite both bride and groom being racially white. Of the 275,000 new interracial marriages in 2010, 43% were white-Hispanic, 14.4% were white-Asian, 11.9% were white-black and the rest were other combinations.[382] However, interracial marriage has become more common over the past decades due to increasing racial diversity, and liberalizing attitudes toward the practice. The number of interracial marriages in the U.S. increased by 65% between 1990 and 2000, and by 20% between 2000 and 2010.[383] "A record 14.6% of all new marriages in the United States in 2008 were between spouses of a different race or ethnicity from one another. ... Rates more than doubled among whites and nearly tripled among blacks between 1980 and 2008. But for both Hispanics and Asians, rates were nearly identical in 2008 and 1980.", according to a Pew Research Center analysis of demographic data from the U.S. Census Bureau.[384]

According to studies by Jenifer L. Bratter and Rosalind B. King made publicly available on the Education Resources Information Center, White female-Black male and White female-Asian male marriages are more prone to divorce than White-White pairings.[385] Conversely, unions between White males and non-White females (and between Hispanics and non-Hispanic persons) have similar or lower risks of divorce than White-White marriages, unions between white male-black female last longer than white-white pairings or white-Asian pairings.[385]

Brazil[edit]
See also: Race in Brazil
Multiracial Brazilians make up 42.6% of Brazil's population, 79.782 million people, and they live in all regions of Brazil. Multiracial Brazilians are mainly people of mixed European, African, East Asian (mostly Japanese) and Amerindian ancestry.

Interracial marriages comprised 22.6% of all marriages in 2000. 15.7% of blacks, 24.4% of whites and 27.6% of Pardos (mixed-race/brown) married someone whose race was different from their own.[386]

Genetic admixture[edit]
Main article: Genetic admixture
Sexual reproduction between two populations reduces the genetic distance between the populations. During the Age of Discovery which began in the early 15th century, European explorers sailed all across the globe reaching all the major continents. In the process they came into contact with many populations that had been isolated for thousands of years. The Tasmanian aboriginals were one of the most isolated groups on the planet.[387] Many died from disease and conflict, but a number of their descendants survive today, often as mixed aboriginal and British. This is an example of how modern migrations have begun to reduce the genetic divergence of the human species.

New world demographics were radically changed within a short time following the voyage of Columbus.[387] The colonization of the Americas brought Native Americans into contact with the distant populations of Europe, Africa and Asia.[387] As a result, many countries in the Americas have significant and complex multiracial populations. Furthermore, many who identify themselves by only one race still have multiracial ancestry.

Admixture in the United States[edit]
See also: Genetic history of indigenous peoples of the Americas and Multiracial American
Admixture in European-American population
 % European admixture	Frequency
90C100	68%
80C89.9	22%
70C79.9	8%
60C69.9	< 1%
50C59.9	< 1%
40C49.9	< 1%
0C39.9	0
Some claim the vast majority of African-Americans possess varying degrees of European admixture (the average Black American is 20% European) although studies suggest the Native American admixture in Black Americans is highly exaggerated; some estimates put average African-American possession of European admixture at 25% with figures as high as 50% in the Northeast and less than 10% in the south. A recent study by Mark D. Shriver of a European-American sample found that the average admixture in the white population is 0.7% African and 3.2% Native American. However, 70% of the sample had no African admixture. The other 30% had African admixture ranging from 2% to 20% with an average of 2.3%. By extrapolating these figures to the whole population some scholars suggest that up to 74 million European-Americans may have African admixture in the same range (2C20%).

Dr Mark Shriver, the team leader of the study, found that he had 11% West African ancestry though he identifies as white. Studies based on skin reflectance have shown the color line in the US applied selective pressure on genes that code for skin color but did not apply any selective pressure on other invisible African genes. Since there are an estimated 6 genetic loci involved in skin color determination it is possible for someone to have 15C20% African admixture and not possess any of alleles that code for dark skin.[dubious C discuss] This is the basis of the passing phenomenon. Thus, the percentage of African admixture amongst white Americans can be relatively high without any significant change in skin tone.

Within the African-Americans population, the amount of African admixture is directly correlated with darker skin since less selective pressure against dark skin is applied within the group of "non-passing" individuals. Thus, African-Americans may have a much wider range of African admixture (>0C100%), whereas European-Americans have a lower range (2C20%).

A small overlap exists such that it is possible that someone who identifies himself as white may have more African admixture than a person who identifies himself as black.[388][389]


The Trapper's Bride shows a trapper, Francois, paying $600 in trade goods for an Indian woman to be his wife, ca. 1837
A statistical analysis done in 1958 using historical census data and historical data on immigration and birth rates concluded that 21% of the white population had black ancestors. The growth in the white population could not be attributed to births in the white population and immigration from Europe alone, but had received significant contribution from the African American population as well.[390] The author states in 1958:

The data presented in this study indicate that the popular belief in the non-African background of white persons is invalid. Over twenty-eight million white persons are descendants of persons of African origin. Furthermore, the majority of the persons with African ancestry are classified as white.

In the United States intermarriage among Filipinos with other races is common. They have the largest number of interracial marriages among Asian immigrant groups, as documented in California.[391] It is also noted that 21.8% of Filipino Americans are of mixed blood, second among Asian Americans, and is the fastest growing.[392]

Admixture in Latin America[edit]
Background[edit]
Prior to the European conquest of the Americas the demographics of Latin America was naturally 100% American Indian. Today those who identify themselves as Native Americans are small minorities in many countries. For example, the CIA lists Argentina's native population at 0.9%, Brazil's at 0.4%, and Uruguay's at 0%.[393] However, the range varies widely from country to country in Latin America with some countries having significantly larger Amerindian minorities. According to official statistics as reported by the National Commission for the Development of Indigenous Peoples or CDI Amerindians make up 10-14%[394] of the population of Mexico.


Depiction of casta system in Mexico, 18th century
The early conquest of Latin America was primarily carried out by male soldiers and sailors from Spain and Portugal. Since they carried very few European women on their journeys the new settlers married and fathered children with Amerindian women and also with women imported from Africa. This process of miscegenation was even encouraged by the Spanish monarchy and it led to the system of stratification known as the Casta. This system had Europeans (Spaniards and Portuguese) at the top of the hierarchy followed by those of mixed race. Unmixed Blacks and Native Americans were at the bottom. A philosophy of whitening emerged in which Amerindian and African culture was stigmatized in favor of European values. Many Amerindian languages were lost as mixed race offspring adopted Spanish and Portuguese as their first languages. Only towards the end of the 19th century and beginning of the 20th century did large numbers of Europeans begin to migrate to South America and consequently altering its demographics.

In addition many Africans were shipped to regions all over the Americas and were present in many of the early voyages of the conquistadors. Brazil has the largest population of African descendants outside Africa. Other countries such as Jamaica, Cuba, Puerto Rico, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Venezuela, Colombia, and Ecuador still have sizeable populations identified as Black. However countries such as Argentina and Chile do not have a visible African presence today. Census information from the early 19th century shows that people categorized as Black made up to 30% of the population, or around 400,000 people.[395] Though almost completely absent today, their contribution to Argentine culture is significant and include the tango, the milonga and the zamba, words of Bantu origin.[396]

Demographics of Brazil in 1835, 1940, 2000 and 2008[397][398]
Year	White	Brown	Black
1835	24.4%	18.2%	51.4%
1940	64%	21%	14%
2000	53.7%	38.5%	6.2%
2008	48.8%	43.8%	6.5%
The ideology of whitening encouraged non-whites to seek white or lighter skinned partners. This dilution of non-white admixture would be beneficial to their offspring as they would face less stigmatization and find it easier to assimilate into mainstream society. After successive generations of European gene flow, non-white admixture levels would drop below levels at which skin color or physical appearance is not affected thus allowing individuals to identify as white. In many regions, the native and black populations were simply overwhelmed by a succession of waves of European immigration.

Historians and scientists are thus interested in tracing the fate of Native Americans and Africans from the past to the future. The questions remain about what proportion of these populations simply died out and what proportion still has descendants alive today including those who do not racially identify themselves as their ancestors would have. Admixture testing has thus become a useful objective tool in shedding light on the demographic history of Latin America.

Recent studies[edit]

A Spaniard plays with his mixed-race daughter while his Mulatto wife looks on, 1763
Unlike in the United States, there were no anti-miscegenation policies in Latin America. Though still a racially stratified society there were no significant barriers to gene flow between the three populations. As a result, admixture profiles are a reflection of the colonial populations of Africans, Europeans and Amerindians. The pattern is also sex biased in that the African and Amerindian maternal lines are found in significantly higher proportions than African or Amerindian Y chromosomal lines. This is an indication that the primary mating pattern was that of European males with Amerindian or African females. According to the study more than half the white populations of the Latin American countries studied have some degree of either Native American or African admixture (MtDNA or Y Chromosome). In countries such as Chile and Colombia almost the entire white population was shown to have some non-white admixture[399][400][401][402]

Frank Moya Pons, a Dominican historian documented that Spanish colonists intermarried with Tano women, and, over time, these mestizo descendants intermarried with Africans, creating a tri-racial Creole culture. 1514 census records reveal that 40% of Spanish men in the colony of Santo Domingo had Tano wives.[403] A 2002 study conducted in Puerto Rico suggests that over 61% of the population possess Amerindian mtDNA.[404]

Admixture in the Philippines[edit]
Historically, admixture has been a common phenomenon in the Philippines. The Philippines were originally settled by Australoid peoples called Negritos which now form the country's aboriginal community. Admixture occurred between this earlier group and the mainstream Malayo-Polynesian population.[286]

There has been Indian migration to and influence in the Philippines since the precolonial era. About 25% of the words in the Tagalog language are Sanskrit terms and about 5% of the country's population possess Indian ancestry from antiquity.[405] There has been a Chinese presence in the Philippines since the 9th century. However, large-scale migrations of Chinese to the Philippines only started during the Spanish colonial era, when the world market was opened to the Philippines. It is estimated that among Filipinos, 10%C20% have some Chinese ancestry and 1.5% are "full-blooded" Chinese.[287]

According to the American anthropologist Dr. H. Otley Beyer, the ancestry of Filipinos is 2% Arab. This dates back to when Arab traders intermarried with the local Malay Filipina female populations during the pre-Spanish history of the Philippines.[114] A recent genetic study by Stanford University indicates that at least 3.6% of the population are European or of part European descent from both Spanish and United States colonization.[406]

Admixture among the Romani people[edit]

Interior of a gipsy's house in Brazil c. 1820, by Debret

Romani dancers in Romania
Genetic evidence has shown that the Romani people ("Gypsies") originated from the Indian subcontinent and mixed with the local populations in Central Asia, the Middle East, and Europe. In the 1990s, it was discovered that Romani populations carried large frequencies of particular Y chromosomes (inherited paternally) that otherwise exist only in populations from South Asia, in addition to fairly significant frequencies of particular mitochondrial DNA (inherited maternally) that is rare outside South Asia.

47.3% of Romani males carry Y chromosomes of haplogroup H-M82 which is rare outside of the Indian subcontinent.[407] Mitochondrial haplogroup M, most common in Indian subjects and rare outside Southern Asia, accounts for nearly 30% of Romani people.[407] A more detailed study of Polish Romani shows this to be of the M5 lineage, which is specific to India.[408] Moreover, a form of the inherited disorder congenital myasthenia is found in Romani subjects. This form of the disorder, caused by the 1267delG mutation, is otherwise only known in subjects of Indian ancestry. This is considered to be the best evidence of the Indian ancestry of the Romanies.[409]

The Romanis have been described as "a conglomerate of genetically isolated founder populations",[410] while a number of common Mendelian disorders among Romanies from all over Europe indicates "a common origin and founder effect".[410] See also this table:[411]

A study from 2001 by Gresham et al. suggests "a limited number of related founders, compatible with a small group of migrants splitting from a distinct caste or tribal group".[412] Also the study pointed out that "genetic drift and different levels and sources of admixture, appear to have played a role in the subsequent differentiation of populations".[412] The same study found that "a single lineage ... found across Romani populations, accounts for almost one-third of Romani males. A similar preservation of a highly resolved male lineage has been reported elsewhere only for Jewish priests".[412] See also the Cohen Modal Haplotype.

A 2004 study by Morar et al. concluded that the Romani are "a founder population of common origins that has subsequently split into multiple socially divergent and geographically dispersed Gypsy groups".[409] The same study revealed that this population "was founded approximately 32C40 generations ago, with secondary and tertiary founder events occurring approximately 16C25 generations ago".[409]

See also[edit]
A Racial Program for the Twentieth Century
Amalgamation (race)
Anti-miscegenation laws
Discrimination based on skin color
Ethnic pornography
Exogamy
Interracial attraction
Interracial marriage
Interracial romance in film
Melungeon
Mestizo
Mixed Race Day
Multiculturalism
Multiracial
Passing (racial identity)
Pla?age
Race and genetics
Race and society
Race of the future
Racial Integrity Act of 1924
Racism
Notes and references[edit]
^ Jump up to: a b "Miscegenation: Definition of Miscegenation at Dictionary.com". Retrieved 31 January 2010.
Jump up ^ Downing, Karen; Nichols, Darlene; Webster, Kelly (2005). Multiracial America: A Resource Guide on the History and Literature of Interracial Issues. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. p. 9. ISBN 0-8108-5199-7.
Jump up ^ Newman, Richard (1999). "Miscegenation". In Kwame Appiah and Henry Louis Gates, Jr. Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American Experience (1st ed.). New York: Basic Civitas Books. p. 1320. ISBN 0-465-00071-1. Miscegenation, a term for sexual relations across racial lines; no longer in use because of its racist implications
Jump up ^ Pascoe, P. (1996). "Miscegenation Law, Court Cases, and Ideologies of "Race" in Twentieth-Century America". The Journal of American History 83 (1): 44C69. doi:10.2307/2945474.
Jump up ^ http://biblioteca.ibge.gov.br/visualizacao/periodicos/1075/cd_2010_trabalho_rendimento_amostra.pdf
Jump up ^ http://biblioteca.ibge.gov.br/visualizacao/periodicos/545/cd_2010_educacao_e_deslocamento.pdf
Jump up ^ "The Miscegenation Hoax". Museum of Hoaxes. Retrieved 2 April 2008.
Jump up ^ Hollinger, D. A. (2003). "Amalgamation and Hypodescent: The Question of Ethnoracial Mixture in the History of the United States". The American Historical Review 108 (5): 1363C1390. doi:10.1086/529971.
Jump up ^ "Franz Boas". C250 Columbians ahead of their time. Columbia University.
Jump up ^ Ashley Montagu (1997). Man's most dangerous myth: the fallacy of race. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8039-4648-4. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
Jump up ^ Ashley Montagu (1999). Race and IQ. Oxford University Press. pp. 82C. ISBN 978-0-19-510221-5. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b Frank W Sweet (1 January 2005). "The Invention of the Color Line: 1691Essays on the Color Line and the One-Drop Rule". Backentyme Essays. Retrieved 4 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Groundbreaking Interracial Marriage". ABC News. June 14, 2007. Retrieved May 1, 2016.
Jump up ^ Karthikeyan, Hrishi; Chin, Gabriel (2002). "Preserving Racial Identity: Population Patterns and the Application of Anti-Miscegenation Statutes to Asian Americans, 1910C1950". Asian Law Journal 9 (1). SSRN 283998.
Jump up ^ "Where were Interracial Couples Illegal?". LovingDay. Retrieved 13 July 2008.
Jump up ^ "Courtroom History" Lovingday.org Retrieved 28 June 2007
Jump up ^ Stein, Edward (2004). "Past and present proposed amendments to the United States constitution regarding marriage". Washington University Law Quarterly 82 (3). SSRN 576181.
Jump up ^ Ehud R. Toledano (1998). Slavery and abolition in the Ottoman Middle East. University of Washington Press. pp. 13C4. ISBN 0-295-97642-X.
Jump up ^ "Jotawa: Afro-Asians in East Africa". Color Q World. Retrieved 15 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Marina Carter; James Ng Foong Kwong (2009). Abacus and Mah Jong: Sino-Mauritian Settlement and Economic Consolidation. Volume 1 of European expansion and indigenous response, v. 1. BRILL. p. 199. ISBN 9004175725. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Paul Younger Professor Emeritus of Religious Studies McMaster University (2009). New Homelands : Hindu Communities in Mauritius, Guyana, Trinidad, South Africa, Fiji, and East Africa: Hindu Communities in Mauritius, Guyana, Trinidad, South Africa, Fiji, and East Africa. Oxford University Press. p. 33. ISBN 0199741921. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ "What Inter-Ethnic Marriage In Mauritius Tells Us About The Nature of Ethnicity" (PDF): 15. Archived from the original on 18 May 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Brian L. Moore (1995). Cultural Power, Resistance, and Pluralism: Colonial Guyana, 1838-1900. Volume 22 of McGill-Queen's studies in ethnic history (illustrated ed.). McGill-Queen's Press - MQUP. pp. 272C273. ISBN 077351354X. ISSN 0846-8869. Retrieved June 1, 2015.
Jump up ^ Huguette Ly-Tio-Fane Pineo; Edouard Lim Fat (2008). From alien to citizen: the integration of the Chinese in Mauritius. ditions de l'ocan Indien. p. 174. ISBN 9990305692. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Huguette Ly Tio Fane-Pineo (1985). Chinese Diaspora in Western Indian Ocean. Ed. de l'ocan indien. p. 287. ISBN 9990305692. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ "What Inter-Ethnic Marriage In Mauritius Tells Us About The Nature of Ethnicity" (PDF): 16. Archived from the original on 18 May 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Monique Dinan (2002). Mauritius in the Making: Across the Censuses, 1846-2000. Nelson Mandela Centre for African Culture, Ministry of Arts & Culture. p. 41. ISBN 9990390460. Retrieved June 1, 2015.
Jump up ^ Jean-Aim Rakotoarisoa; Razafindrazaka, H.; Pagani, L.; Ricaut, F.-X.; Antao, T.; Capredon, M.; Sambo, C.; Radimilahy, C.; et al. (2014-01-06). "Genome-wide evidence of AustronesianCBantu admixture and cultural reversion in a hunter-gatherer group of Madagascar". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS) 111 (3): 936C941. Bibcode:2014PNAS..111..936P. doi:10.1073/pnas.1321860111. Retrieved 2014-04-11.
Jump up ^ "Dienekes Anthropology Blog: Austronesian (~1/3) Bantu (~2/3) admixture in Madagascar". Dienekes.blogspot.com. 2014-01-29. Retrieved 2014-04-11.
Jump up ^ Pan 1994, p. 157
Jump up ^ David Nugent, Joan Vincent (2004). A companion to the anthropology of politics. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 407. ISBN 0-631-22972-8
Jump up ^ Yancey, George (22 March 2007). "Experiencing Racism: Differences in the Experiences of Whites Married to Blacks and Non-Black Racial Minorities". Journal of Comparative Family Studies (University of Calgary: Social Sciences) 38 (2): 197C213.
Jump up ^ Fredrickson, G. M. (2005). "Mulattoes and metis. Attitudes toward miscegenation in the United States and France since the seventeenth century". International Social Science Journal 57 (183): 103C112. doi:10.1111/j.0020-8701.2005.00534.x.
Jump up ^ Sweet, Frank. W. (1 November 2006). "Why Did Virginia's Rulers Invent a Color Line?". Essays on the Color Line and the One-Drop Rule. Backintyme Essays. Retrieved 13 July 2008.
Jump up ^ "Echoes of Freedom: South Asian Pioneers in California, 1899C1965 C Chapter 9: Home Life". University of California, Berkeley. Retrieved 8 January 2009.
Jump up ^ "More black women consider 'dating out'". USA Today. 8/5/2007.
Jump up ^ "African & Native Americans share a rich history". African American Registry. c. 2010. Retrieved 2014-04-11.
Jump up ^ Dorothy A. Mays (1 January 2004). Women in Early America: Struggle, Survival, and Freedom in a New World. ABC-CLIO. p. 218. ISBN 978-1-85109-429-5.
Jump up ^ "Border Love on the Rio Grande: African American Men and Latinas in the Rio Grande Valley of South Texas (1850-1940)". The Black Past. 2003-06-10. Retrieved 2014-04-11.
Jump up ^ Chin, Gabriel and Hrishi Karthikeyan, (2002) Asian Law Journal vol. 9 "Preserving Racial Identity: Population Patterns and the Application of Anti-Miscegenation Statutes to Asian Americans, 1910C1950". Papers.ssrn.com. Retrieved 29 January 2012.
Jump up ^ "The United States". Chinese blacks in the Americas. Color Q World. Retrieved 15 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Susan Dente Ross; Paul Martin Lester (19 April 2011). Images That Injure: Pictorial Stereotypes in the Media. ABC-CLIO. pp. 144C. ISBN 978-0-313-37892-8. Retrieved 2 March 2012.
Jump up ^ Evaluation of Group Genetic Ancestry of Populations from Philadelphia and Dakar in the Context of Sex-Biased Admixture in the Americas Stefflova K, Dulik MC, Pai AA, Walker AH, Zeigler-Johnson CM, Gueye SM, Schurr TG, Rebbeck TR C PLoS ONE (2009). [1]
Jump up ^ Benson Tong (2004). Asian American children: a historical handbook and guide. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 38C. ISBN 978-0-313-33042-1. Retrieved 2 March 2012.
Jump up ^ Love's revolution: interracial marriage by Maria P.P. Root. Page 180
Jump up ^ "Bob Jones University Drops Interracial Dating Ban". Christianity Today.
Jump up ^ "Tiger Woods alienates black community with white lovers". Daily News (New York). 6 December 2009.
Jump up ^ "Miscegenation". Nave's Topical Bible. Bible Tools. Retrieved 13 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Webster, Wesley. "Does the Bible Forbid Interracial Dating and Marriage?". Bible Study. Retrieved 13 July 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b Swanbrow, Diane (23 March 2000). "Intimate Relationships Between Races More Common Than Thought". University of Michigan. Retrieved 15 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Krugman, Paul, The Conscience of a Liberal, W W Norton & Company, 2007, p. 210.
Jump up ^ Gallup Poll, "Record-High 86% Approve of Black-White Marriages". Retrieved 13 September 2012.
Jump up ^ Foster, Mary. "Interracial Couple Denied Marriage License in La". Associated Press. 16 October 2009.
^ Jump up to: a b Romanzo Adams (2005). Interracial Marriage in Hawaii. Kessinger Publishing. p. 396. ISBN 978-1-4179-9268-3. Retrieved 14 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Margaret M. Schwertfeger (1982). Interethnic Marriage and Divorce in Hawaii A Panel Study of 1968 First Marriages. Kessinger Publishing. Retrieved 14 July 2010.
Jump up ^ David Anthony Chiriboga; Linda S. Catron (1991). Divorce: crisis, challenge, or relief?. NYU Press. p. 254. ISBN 978-0-8147-1450-8. Retrieved 14 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Gary A. Cretser; Joseph J. Leon (1982). Intermarriage in the United States, Volume 5. Psychology Press. p. 58. ISBN 978-0-917724-60-2. Retrieved 14 July 2010.
Jump up ^ United States Bureau of Education (1921). Bulletin, Issues 13C18. U.S. G.P.O. p. 27. Retrieved 14 July 2010.
Jump up ^ United States. Office of Education (1920). Bulletin, Issue 16. U.S. Dept. of Health, Education, and Welfare, Office of Education. p. 27. Retrieved 14 July 2010.
Jump up ^ American Association of Physical Anthropologists, Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology (1920). American journal of physical anthropology, Volume 3. A. R. Liss. p. 492. Retrieved 14 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Gary A. Cretser; Joseph J. Leon (1982). Intermarriage in the United States, Volume 5. Routledge. p. 111. ISBN 978-0-917724-60-2. Retrieved 14 July 2010.
Jump up ^ American Genetic Association (1919). The Journal of heredity, Volume 10. American Genetic Association. p. 42. Retrieved 14 July 2010.
Jump up ^ American Genetic Association (1919). J hered, Volume 10. American Genetic Association. p. 42. Retrieved 14 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Alfred Emanuel Smith (1905). New Outlook, Volume 81. Outlook Publishing Company, Inc. p. 988. Retrieved 14 July 2010.
Jump up ^ The Outlook, Volume 81. Outlook Co. 1905. p. 988. Retrieved 14 July 2010.
^ Jump up to: a b c Lowell Gudmundson (May 1984). "Black into White in Nineteenth Century Spanish America: Afro-American Assimilation in Argentina and Costa Rica". Slavery and Abolition 5 (1). Retrieved 2014-04-11.
Jump up ^ Taste of Peru. Taste of Peru. Retrieved 29 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Teresa A. Meade (2011). A History of Modern Latin America: 1800 to the Present. Volume 4 of Wiley Blackwell Concise History of the Modern World (illustrated ed.). John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 1444358111. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Isabelle Lausent-Herrera (2010). Walton Look Lai; Chee Beng Tan, eds. The Chinese in Latin America and the Caribbean. Brill ebook titles. BRILL. p. 143. ISBN 9004182136. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Adam McKeown (2001). Chinese Migrant Networks and Cultural Change: Peru, Chicago, and Hawaii 1900-1936 (illustrated ed.). University of Chicago Press. p. 47. ISBN 0226560252. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Robert G. Lee (1999). Orientals: Asian Americans in Popular Culture. Temple University Press. p. 75. ISBN 1439905711. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Chee-Beng Tan (2004). Chinese Overseas: Comparative Cultural Issues (illustrated ed.). Hong Kong University Press. p. 47. ISBN 9622096611. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Josephine D. Lee; Imogene L. Lim; Yuko Matsukawa (2002). Re/collecting Early Asian America: Essays in Cultural History. Temple University Press. p. 181. ISBN 1439901201. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Walton Look Lai (1998). The Chinese in the West Indies, 1806-1995: A Documentary History. Walton Look Lai (illustrated ed.). Press, University of the West Indies. p. 8. ISBN 9766400210. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Michael J. Gonzales (2014). Plantation Agriculture and Social Control in Northern Peru, 1875C1933. University of Texas Press. ISBN 1477306021. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Isabelle Lausent-Herrera (2010). Walton Look Lai; Chee Beng Tan, eds. The Chinese in Latin America and the Caribbean. Brill ebook titles. BRILL. p. 144. ISBN 9004182136. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Isabelle Lausent-Herrera (2010). Walton Look Lai; Chee Beng Tan, eds. The Chinese in Latin America and the Caribbean. Brill ebook titles. BRILL. p. 145. ISBN 9004182136. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Isabelle Lausent-Herrera (2010). Walton Look Lai; Chee Beng Tan, eds. The Chinese in Latin America and the Caribbean. Brill ebook titles. BRILL. p. 146. ISBN 9004182136. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Michael J. Gonzales (2014). Plantation Agriculture and Social Control in Northern Peru, 1875C1933. University of Texas Press. ISBN 1477306021. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Michael J. Gonzales (1985). Plantation Agriculture and Social Control in Northern Peru, 1875-1933. Brill ebook titles. Volume 62 of Texas Pan American Series. University of Texas Press. p. 100. ISBN 029276491X. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Elliott Young (2014). Alien Nation: Chinese Migration in the Americas from the Coolie Era Through World War II. The David J. Weber Series in the New Borderlands History. Volume 4 of Wiley Blackwell Concise History of the Modern World (illustrated ed.). UNC Press Books. p. 82. ISBN 1469612968. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ From an Occasional Correspondent (June 28, 1873). "THE COOLIE TRADE.; THE SLAVERY OF THE PRESENT. THE TRAFFIC OF PERU HIRING OF THE COO- LIE HORRORS OF THE MIDDLE PASSAGE THE COOLIE'S FATE.". New York Times (CALLAO, Peru). Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Identity, Rebellion, and Social Justice Among Chinese Contract Workers in Nineteenth-Century Cuba [2]
Jump up ^ Cuba  History.com Articles, Video, Pictures and Facts. History.com. Retrieved 29 January 2012.
Jump up ^ David Stanley (January 1997). Cuba: a Lonely Planet travel survival kit. Lonely Planet. ISBN 978-0-86442-403-7. Retrieved 29 January 2012.
Jump up ^ CIA C The World Factbook. Cia.gov. Retrieved 29 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Mendizabal, I.; Sandoval, K.; Berniell-Lee, G.; Calafell, F.; Salas, A.; Martinez-Fuentes, A.; Comas, D. (2008). "Genetic origin, admixture, and asymmetry in maternal and paternal human lineages in Cuba". BMC Evolutionary Biology 8: 213. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-8-213. PMC 2492877. PMID 18644108.
Jump up ^ Chinese Food in Costa Rica by Jacqueline M. Newman. Flavorandfortune.com. Retrieved 2 March 2012.
Jump up ^ Margaret Tyler Mitchell; Scott Pentzer (2008). Costa Rica: a global studies handbook. ABC-CLIO. pp. 249C. ISBN 978-1-85109-992-4. Retrieved 2 March 2012.
Jump up ^ Costa Rica, People. Philip.greenspun.com. Retrieved 29 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Isabelle Lausent-Herrera (2010). Walton Look Lai; Chee Beng Tan, eds. The Chinese in Latin America and the Caribbean. Brill ebook titles. BRILL. p. 116. ISBN 9004182136. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Isabelle Lausent-Herrera (2010). Walton Look Lai; Chee Beng Tan, eds. The Chinese in Latin America and the Caribbean. Brill ebook titles. BRILL. p. 68. ISBN 9004182136. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Preethy Sarah Samuel (2000). Cultural Continuity Or Assimilation in the Familial Domain of the Indo-Guyanese. Wayne State University. Sociology (illustrated ed.). ProQuest. p. 38. ISBN 0549387625. Retrieved June 1, 2006.
Jump up ^ Margery Kirkpatrick (1993). From the Middle Kingdom to the New World: Aspects of the Chinese Experience in Migration to British Guiana, Volume 1. Volume 1 of From the Middle Kingdom to the New World. M. Kirkpatrick. p. 156. ISBN 9768136278. Retrieved June 1, 2006.
Jump up ^ Margery Kirkpatrick (1993). From the Middle Kingdom to the New World: Aspects of the Chinese Experience in Migration to British Guiana, Volume 1. Volume 1 of From the Middle Kingdom to the New World. M. Kirkpatrick. p. 128. ISBN 9768136278. Retrieved June 1, 2006.
Jump up ^ Thomas William Francis Gann (1972). Ancient cities and modern tribes: exploration and adventure in Maya lands (reprint, illustrated ed.). Ayer Co Pub. p. 247. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Thomas William Francis Gann (1918). The Maya Indians of Southern Yucatan and Northern British Honduras, Volume 572, Issue 64. Native American legal materials collection. Volume 6 of Human relations area files: Yucatec Maya. U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 32. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Thomas Ganns (2001). Terry Rugeley, ed. Maya Wars: Ethnographic Accounts from Nineteenth-century Yucatn (illustrated ed.). University of Oklahoma Press. p. 175. ISBN 0806133554. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Brian L. Moore (1995). Cultural Power, Resistance, and Pluralism: Colonial Guyana, 1838-1900. Volume 22 of McGill-Queen's studies in ethnic history (illustrated ed.). McGill-Queen's Press - MQUP. pp. 272C273. ISBN 077351354X. ISSN 0846-8869. Retrieved June 1, 2015.
Jump up ^ Brian L. Moore (1987). Race, Power, and Social Segmentation in Colonial Society: Guyana After Slavery, 1838-1891. Volume 4 of Caribbean studies (illustrated ed.). Gordon & Breach Science Publishers. p. 181. ISBN 0677219806. ISSN 0275-5793. Retrieved June 1, 2015.
Jump up ^ Julitta Rydlewska, Barbara Braid, eds. (2014). Unity in Diversity, Volume 1: Cultural Paradigm and Personal Identity, Volume 1. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 14. ISBN 1443867292. Archived from the original on 2014. Retrieved June 1, 2015.
Jump up ^ Dennison Moore (1995). Origins and Development of Racial Ideology in Trinidad. Nycan. p. 238. ISBN 0968006000. Retrieved June 1, 2015.
Jump up ^ Selwyn D. Ryan (1999). The Jhandi and the Cross: The Clash of Cultures in Post-creole Trinidad and Tobago. Sir Arthur Lewis Institute of Social and Economic Studies, The University of the West Indies. p. 263. ISBN 9766180318. Retrieved June 1, 2015.
Jump up ^ Rebecca Chiyoko King-O'Riain, Stephen Small, Minelle Mahtani, eds. (2014). Global Mixed Race. NYU Press. pp. 65C66. ISBN 0814770479. Archived from the original on 2014. Retrieved June 1, 2015.
Jump up ^ Regis, Ferne Louanne (April 2011). "The Dougla in Trinidad's Consciousness" (PDF). History in Action (The University of the West Indies (St. Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago) Dept. of History) 2 (1). ISSN 2221-7886. Archived from the original (PDF) on Mar 8, 2011. Retrieved 28 June 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b http://www.latinamericanstudies.org/19-century/Negro-Resistance-Colonial-Mexico.pdf
Jump up ^ Matthew Restall (2005). Beyond Black and Red: African-Native Relations in Colonial Latin America. UNM Press. p. 203. ISBN 978-0-8263-2403-0.
Jump up ^ Afromestizo
Jump up ^ Norman E. Whitten; Arlene Torres (1998). Blackness in Latin America and the Caribbean: Central America and Northern and Western South America. Indiana University Press. p. 429. ISBN 0-253-21193-X.
Jump up ^ Lorna Martin at Negril Beach How sex tourism became the basis of a Royal Court play. The Guardian. 23 July 2006. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
Jump up ^ "Sex tourism: When women do it, it's called 'romance travelling'". Canada.com. 27 January 2007.
Jump up ^ "Sex tourism in full boom". Ottawa Citizen. 8 January 2007.
Jump up ^ Albert Hyma, Mary Stanton. "Streams of civilization" 1. Christian Liberty Press: 215.
^ Jump up to: a b c d "Arab and native intermarriage in Austronesian Asia". ColorQ World. Retrieved 24 December 2008.
Jump up ^ Tarling, Nicholas (1999). The Cambridge History of Southeast Asia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 149. ISBN 0-521-66370-9.
^ Jump up to: a b Leupp, pp. 52C3
^ Jump up to: a b Walter Joseph Fischel (1951). Semitic and Oriental studies: a volume presented to William Popper, professor of Semitic languages, emeritus, on the occasion of his seventy-fifth birthday, October 29, 1949. University of California Press. p. 407. Retrieved 2 March 2012.
Jump up ^ Ty Bunko (Japan). Kenkybu (1928). Memoirs of the Research Department of the Toyo Bunko (the Oriental Library), Issue 2. the University of Michigan: The Toyo Bunko. p. 34. Retrieved 9 February 2011.
Jump up ^ History of Science Society; Acadmie internationale d'histoire des sciences (1939). Isis. Published by the University of Chicago Press for the History of Science Society. p. 120. Retrieved 2 March 2012.
Jump up ^ "SOUTH VIET NAM: The Girls Left Behind". Time. 10 September 1956.
Jump up ^ "When Ways of Life Collide: Multiculturalism and Its Discontents in the Netherlands". Princeton University Press.
^ Jump up to: a b Fischer-Tin, H. (2003). "'White women degrading themselves to the lowest depths' : European networks of prostitution and colonial anxieties in British India and Ceylon ca. 1880-1914". Indian Economic & Social History Review 40 (2): 163C190. doi:10.1177/001946460304000202.
Jump up ^ "Comfort Women Were 'Raped': U.S. Ambassador to Japan". Digital Chosunibuto (English edition). 19 March 2007. Archived from the original on 5 June 2008. Retrieved 2 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Tanaka, Toshiyuki (2002). Japan's Comfort Women: Sexual Slavery and Prostitution During World War II and the Us Occupation. ISBN 978-0-415-19401-3.
Jump up ^ Ailee Moon (1998). Korean American Women: From Tradition to Modern Feminism. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 248C. ISBN 978-0-275-95977-7. Retrieved 10 March 2013.
Jump up ^ Love for Sale: a global history of prostitution by Nils Ringdal, trans Richard Daly. By Sarah Burton. The Independent. November 2004.
Jump up ^ Bali Beach Gigolos Under Fire. Asia Sentinel, 4 May 2010
^ Jump up to: a b Edward H. Schafer (1963). The Golden Peaches of Samarkand: A Study of T?ang Exotics. University of California Press. pp. 22C. ISBN 978-0-520-05462-2. Retrieved 2 March 2012.
Jump up ^ Mark Edward Lewis (30 June 2009). China's Cosmopolitan Empire: The Tang Dynasty. Harvard University Press. pp. 170C. ISBN 978-0-674-03306-1. Retrieved 2 March 2012.
Jump up ^ Jacques Gernet (31 May 1996). A History of Chinese Civilization. Cambridge University Press. p. 294. ISBN 978-0-521-49781-7. Retrieved 2 March 2012.
^ Jump up to: a b c "Chinese of Arab and Persian descent". ColorQ World. Retrieved 23 December 2008.
Jump up ^ University of California (1868C1952), University of California (System), University of California, Berkeley (1951). University of California publications in Semitic philology, Volumes 11C12. University of California Press. p. 407. Retrieved 29 June 2010.
Jump up ^ Ty Bunko (Japan). Kenkybu (1928). Memoirs of the Research Department of the Toyo Bunko (the Oriental Library), Issue 2. the University of Michigan: The Toyo Bunko. p. 34. Retrieved 9 February 2011.
Jump up ^ Patricia Buckley Ebrey; Anne Walthall; James Palais (2008). Pre-modern East Asia: to 1800: A Cultural, Social, and Political History. Cengage Learning. p. 97. ISBN 0-547-00539-3. Retrieved 29 June 2010.
Jump up ^ Amnon Shiloah (2003). Music in the World of Islam. Wayne State University Press. p. 8. ISBN 0-8143-2970-5. Retrieved 29 June 2010.
Jump up ^ Eliot Weinberger (2009). Oranges & Peanuts for Sale. New Directions Publishing. p. 117. ISBN 0-8112-1834-1. Retrieved 29 June 2010.
Jump up ^ Maria Jaschok; Jingjun Shui (2000). The History of Women's Mosques in Chinese Islam: A Mosque of their Own. Routledge. p. 74. ISBN 0-7007-1302-6. Retrieved 29 June 2010.
Jump up ^ Association for Asian studies (Ann Arbor;Michigan) (1976). A-L, Volumes 1C2. Columbia University Press. p. 817. ISBN 0-231-03801-1. Retrieved 29 June 2010.
Jump up ^ Chen, Da-Sheng. "Chinese-Iranian Relations vii. Persian Settlements in Southeastern China during the T'ang, Sung, and Yuan Dynasties". Encyclop?dia Iranica. Retrieved 28 June 2010.
Jump up ^ Joseph Needham (1971). Science and civilisation in China, Volume 4. Cambridge University Press. p. 495. ISBN 0-521-07060-0. Retrieved 29 June 2010.
Jump up ^ Israeli, Raphael (2002). Islam in China. United States of America: Lexington Books. p. 285. ISBN 0-7391-0375-X.
Jump up ^ Gene Expression: Western barbarian + Han women = Hui. Gnxp.com. Retrieved 29 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Michael Dillon (1999). China's Muslim Hui Community: Migration, Settlement and Sects. Richmond: Curzon Press. p. 31. ISBN 0-7007-1026-4. Retrieved 17 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Dru C. Gladney (1996). Muslim Chinese: Ethnic Nationalism in the People's Republic. Cambridge Massachusetts: Harvard Univ Asia Center. p. 245. ISBN 0-674-59497-5. Retrieved 17 August 2010.
Jump up ^ China archaeology and art digest, Volume 3, Issue 4. Art Text (HK) Ltd. 2000. p. 30. Retrieved 17 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Friedrich Ratzel (1898). The history of mankind, Volume 3. Macmillan and co., ltd. p. 355. Retrieved 30 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Melvyn C. Goldstein; Dawei Sherap; William Siebenschuh; William R. Siebenschuh (2006). The A Tibetan Revolutionary: The Political Life and Times of Bapa Phntso Wangye. University of California Press. p. 19. ISBN 0-520-24992-5. Retrieved 30 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Eliakim Littell; Robert S. Littell (1891). Littell's living age, Volume 191. T.H. Carter & Co. p. 606. Retrieved 30 July 2010.
Jump up ^ The National review, Volume 23. W.H. Allen. 1894. p. 81. Retrieved 30 July 2010.
Jump up ^ China Information Committee (1938). China at war, Volumes 1C2. The China Information Publishing Company. p. 54. Retrieved 30 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Lhasa. Concept Publishing Company. 1939. p. 100. Retrieved 30 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Teichman Eric (2009). Travels of a Consular Officer in Eastern Tibet. BiblioBazaar, LLC. p. 180. ISBN 1-110-31267-9. Retrieved 30 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Charles Bell (1992). Tibet Past and Present. Motilal Banarsidass Publ. p. 243. ISBN 81-208-1048-1. Retrieved 30 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Ildik Bellr-Hann (2008). Community matters in Xinjiang, 1880C1949: towards a historical anthropology of the Uyghur. BRILL. pp. 83C85. ISBN 90-04-16675-0. Retrieved 30 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Henry Lansdell (1894). Chinese Central Asia: A Ride to Little Tibet, Volume 2. p. 77. Retrieved 30 July 2010.
Jump up ^ James Hastings; John Alexander Selbie; Louis Herbert Gray (1916). Encyclop?dia of religion and ethics, Volume 8. T. & T. Clark. p. 893. Retrieved 30 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Martijn Theodoor Houtsma (1987). E.J. Brill's first encyclopaedia of Islam, 1913C1936, Volume 2. BRILL. p. 849. ISBN 90-04-08265-4. Retrieved 30 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Sven Anders Hedin (1899). Through Asia, Volume 2. Harper and brothers. p. 954. Retrieved 30 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Robyn R. Iredale; Naran Bilik; Fei Guo (2003). China's Minorities on the Move: Selected Case Studies. M.E. Sharpe. p. 120. ISBN 0-7656-1023-X. Retrieved 30 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Gnther Schlee (2002). Imagined Differences: Hatred and the Construction of Identity, Volume 2001. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 76. ISBN 1-4039-6031-3. Retrieved 30 July 2010.
Jump up ^ "Global Mappings: Nanjing Anti-African Protests of 1988C89". Diaspora.northwestern.edu. 1989-01-16. Retrieved 2014-04-11.
^ Jump up to: a b Christian Science Monitor: "In China, mixed marriages can be a labor of love C In one major Chinese city, marriages between Chinese and Africans are on the rise. In a country known for monoculture, it isn't easy" By Yepoka Yeebo September 21, 2013
Jump up ^ Moffett, Samuel H. (1998). A History of Christianity in Asia: 1500C1900. Bishop Henry McNeal Turner Studies in North American Black Religion Series. Volume 2 of A History of Christianity in Asia: 1500C1900. Volume 2 (2, illustrated, reprint ed.). Orbis Books. p. 222. ISBN 1-57075-450-0. Retrieved December 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ Moffett, Samuel H. (2005). A history of Christianity in Asia, Volume 2 (2 ed.). Orbis Books. p. 222. ISBN 1-57075-450-0. Retrieved December 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ Free China Review, Volume 11. W.Y. Tsao. 1961. p. 54. Retrieved December 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ Covell, Ralph R. (1998). Pentecost of the Hills in Taiwan: The Christian Faith Among the Original Inhabitants (illustrated ed.). Hope Publishing House. p. 96. ISBN 0-932727-90-5. Retrieved December 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ Manthorpe, Jonathan (2008). Forbidden Nation: A History of Taiwan (illustrated ed.). Macmillan. p. 77. ISBN 0-230-61424-8. Retrieved December 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ Meiqi Lee (2004). Being Eurasian: memories across racial divides. Hong Kong University Press. p. 262. ISBN 962-209-671-9. EJ Eitel, in the late 1890s, claims that the 'half-caste population in Hong Kong' were from the earliest days of the settlement almost exclusively the offspring of liaisons between European men and women of outcast ethnic groups such as Tanka. Lethbridge refutes the theory saying it was based on a 'myth' propagated by xenophobic Cantonese to account for the establishment of the Hong Kong Eurasian community. Carl Smith's study in late 1960s on the protected women seems, to some degree, support Eitel's theory. Smith says that the Tankas experienced certain restrictions within the traditional Chinese social structure. Custom precluded their intermarriage with the Cantonese and Hakka-speaking populations. The Tanka women did not have bound feet. Their opportunities for settlement on shore were limited. They were hence not as closely tied to Confucian ethics as other Chinese ethnic groups. Being a group marginal to the traditional Chinese society of the Puntis (Cantonese), they did not have the same social pressure in dealing with Europeans (CT Smith, Chung Chi Bulletin, 27). 'Living under the protection of a foreigner,' says Smith, 'could be a ladder to financial security, if not respectability, for some of the Tanka boat girls' (13 ).
Jump up ^ Maria Jaschok; Suzanne Miers, eds. (1994). Women and Chinese patriarchy: submission, servitude, and escape. Zed Books. p. 223. ISBN 1-85649-126-9. Retrieved 1 November 2011. He states that they had a near-monopoly of the trade in girls and women, and that: The half-caste population in Hong Kong were, from the earliest days of the settlement of the Colony and down to the present day, almost exclusively the offspring of these Tan-ka people. But, like the Tan-ka people themselves, they are happily under the influence of a process of continuous re-absorption in the mass of Chinese residents of the Colony (1895 p. 169)
Jump up ^ Helen F. Siu (2011). Helen F. Siu, ed. Merchants' Daughters: Women, Commerce, and Regional Culture in South. Hong Kong University Press. p. 305. ISBN 988-8083-48-1. Retrieved 2 November 2011. The half-caste population of Hongkong were . . . almost exclusively the offspring of these Tan-ka women. EJ Eitel, Europe in , the History of Hongkong from the Beginning to the Year 1882 (Taipei: Chen-Wen Publishing Co., originally published in Hong Kong by Kelly and Walsh. 1895, 1968), 169.
Jump up ^ Henry J. Lethbridge (1978). Hong Kong, stability and change: a collection of essays. Oxford University Press. p. 75. Retrieved 1 November 2011. The half-caste population in Hong Kong were, from the earliest days of the settlement of the Colony and down to the present day [1895], almost exclusively the off-spring of these Tan-ka people
Jump up ^ Public Library Ernest John Eitel (1895). Europe in China: the history of Hongkong from the beginning to the year 1882. London: Luzac & Co. p. 169. Retrieved 2 November 2011.
Jump up ^ Weiss, A. M. (2008). "South Asian Muslims in Hong Kong: Creation of a 'Local Boy' Identity". Modern Asian Studies 25 (3): 417. doi:10.1017/S0026749X00013895.
Jump up ^ Ina Baghdiantz McCabe, Gelina Harlaftis, Ianna Pepelas Minoglou (2005). Diaspora Entrepreneurial Networks: Four Centuries of History. Berg Publishers. p. 256. ISBN 1-85973-880-X.
Jump up ^ Jonathan Porter (1996). Macau, the imaginary city: culture and society, 1557 to the present. Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-2836-2. Retrieved 29 January 2012.
Jump up ^ macau C The Las Vegas of the East >>Inscrutable Chinese>>English>>. Bjrhby.com. Retrieved 29 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Annabel Jackson (2003). Taste of Macau: Portuguese Cuisine on the China Coast (illustrated ed.). Hong Kong University Press. p. x. ISBN 962-209-638-7. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
Jump up ^ Jo?o de Pina-Cabral, p. 39: To be a Macanese is fundamentally to be from Macao with Portuguese ancestors, but not necessarily to be of Sino-Portuguese descent. The local community was born from Portuguese men. [] but in the beginning the woman was Goanese, Siamese, Indo-Chinese, Malay C they came to Macao in our boats. Sporadically it was a Chinese woman.
Jump up ^ Jo?o de Pina-Cabral (2002). Between China and Europe: person, culture and emotion in Macao. Volume 74 of London School of Economics monographs on social anthropology (illustrated ed.). Berg. p. 39. ISBN 0-8264-5749-5. Retrieved 2012-03-01. To be a Macanese is fundamentally to be from Macao with Portuguese ancestors, but not necessarily to be of Sino-Portuguese descent. The local community was born from Portuguese men. [] but in the beginning the woman was Goanese, Siamese, Indo-Chinese, Malay C they came to Macao in our boats. Sporadically it was a Chinese woman.
Jump up ^ C. A. Montalto de Jesus (1902). Historic Macao (2 ed.). Kelly & Walsh, Limited. p. 41. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
Jump up ^ Austin Coates (2009). A Macao Narrative. Volume 1 of Echoes: Classics of Hong Kong Culture and History. Hong Kong University Press. p. 44. ISBN 962-209-077-X. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
Jump up ^ Cam?es Center (Columbia University. Research Institute on International Change) (1989). Cam?es Center Quarterly, Volume 1. Volume 1 of Echoes: Classics of Hong Kong Culture and History. The Center. p. 29. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
Jump up ^ Jo?o de Pina-Cabral, p. 39: When we established ourselves here, the Chinese ostracized us. The Portuguese had their wives, then, that came from abroad, but they could have no contact with the Chinese women, except the fishing folk, the tanka women and the female slaves. Only the lowest class of Chinese contacted with the Portuguese in the first centuries. But later the strength of Christianization, of the priests, started to convince the Chinese to become Catholic. [] But, when they started to be Catholics, they adopted Portuguese baptismal names and were ostracized by the Chinese Buddhists. So they joined the Portuguese community and their sons started having Portuguese education without a single drop of Portuguese blood.
Jump up ^ Jo?o de Pina-Cabral, p. 164: I was personally told of people that, to this day, continue to hide the fact that their mothers had been lower-class Chinese women C often even tanka (fishing folk) women who had relations with Portuguese sailors and soldiers.
^ Jump up to: a b Society of Macau: Macanese People, Public Holidays in Macau, Tanka People. Alibris. ISBN 978-1-157-45360-4 Retrieved 29 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Jo?o de Pina-Cabral, p. 164
^ Jump up to: a b Jo?o de Pina-Cabral, p. 165
Jump up ^ Jo?o de Pina-Cabral, p. 164: Henrique de Senna Fernandes, another Macanese author, wrote a short story about a tanka girl who has an affair with a Portuguese sailor. In the end, the man returns to his native country and takes their little girl with him, leaving the mother abandoned and broken-hearted. As her sailorman picks up the child, A-Chan's words are: 'Cuidadinho ... cuidadinho' ('Careful ... careful'). She resigns herself to ther fate, much as she may never have recovered from the blow (1978).
Jump up ^ Christina Miu Bing Cheng, p. 173: Her slave-like submissiveness is her only attraction to him. A-Chan thus becomes his slave/mistress, an outlet for suppressed sexual urges. The story is an archetypical tragedy of miscegenation. Just as the Tanka community despises A-Chan's cohabitation with a foreign barbarian, Manuel's colleagues mock his 'bad taste' ('gosto degenerado') (Senna Fernandes, 1978: 15) in having a tryst with a boat girl  As such, the Tanka girl is nonchalantly reified and dehumanized as a thing (coisa). Manuel reduces human relations to mere consumption not even of her physical beauty (which has been denied in the description of A-Chan), but her 'Orientalness' of being slave-like and submissive.
Jump up ^ Christina Miu Bing Cheng, p. 170: We can trace this fleeting and shallow relationship in Henrique de Senna Fernandes' short story, A-Chan, A Tancareira, (Ah Chan, the Tanka Girl) (1978). Senna Fernandes (1923C), a Macanese, had written a series of novels set against the context of Macao and some of which were made into films.
Jump up ^ Bamshad, M.; Kivisild, T.; Watkins, W. S.; Dixon, M. E.; Ricker, C. E.; Rao, B. B.; et al. (2001). "Genetic evidence on the origins of Indian caste populations". Genome Research 11 (6): 994C1004. doi:10.1101/gr.GR-1733RR. PMC 311057. PMID 11381027.
Jump up ^ From The Discovery of India by Jawaharlal Nehru, reproduced from History: Modern India (p 108) by S.N. Sen, New Age Publishers, ISBN 81-224-1774-4
Jump up ^ Corbridge, Staurt; Harriss, John (2000). Reinventing India: Liberalization, Hindu Nationalism and Popular Democracy. Polity press. p. 8. ISBN 0-7456-2076-0.
Jump up ^ Jalal, A. (2009). "Conjuring Pakistan: History as Official Imagining" (PDF). International Journal of Middle East Studies 27: 73C89. doi:10.1017/S0020743800061596. JSTOR 176188.
Jump up ^ *Jim Shaffer C "Current archaeological data do not support the existence of an Indo-Aryan or European invasion into South Asia any time in the pre- or protohistoric periods. Instead, it is possible to document archaeologically a series of cultural changes reflecting indigenous cultural developments from prehistoric to historic periods"Jim Shaffer. The Indo-Aryan Invasions: Cultural Myth and Archaeological Reality.
J.P. Mallory C "... the extraordinary difficulty of making a case for expansions from Andronovo to northern India, and attempts to link the Indo-Aryans to such sites as the Beshkent and Vakhsh cultures only gets the Indo-Iranian to Central Asia, but not as far as the seats of the Medes, Persians or Indo-Aryans".
Edwin Bryant C "India is not the only Indo-European-speaking area that has not revealed any archaeological traces of immigration. There is at least a series of archaeological cultures that can be traced approaching the Indian subcontinent, even if discontinuous, which does not seem to be the case for any hypothetical east-to-west emigration"
Bryant, Edwin (2001). The Quest for the Origins of Vedic Culture: The Indo-Aryan Migration Debate. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-513777-9.. Bryant, Edwin F.; Patton, Laurie L., eds. (2005). The Indo-Aryan Controversy: Evidence and inference in Indian history. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-7007-1463-4.
Jump up ^ Trivedi, Bijal P (14 May 2001). "Genetic evidence suggests European migrants may have influenced the origins of India's caste system". J. Craig Venter Institute. Genome News Network. Retrieved 27 January 2005.
Jump up ^ Scientists Connect Indian Castes and European Heritage. Scientific American. 15 May 2001.
Jump up ^ Basu, A.; Mukherjee, N.; Roy, S.; Sengupta, S.; Banerjee, S.; Chakraborty, M.; Dey, B.; Roy, M.; Roy, B.; Bhattacharyya, N. P.; Roychoudhury, S.; Majumder, P. P. (2003). "Ethnic India: A Genomic View, with Special Reference to Peopling and Structure". Genome Research 13 (10): 2277C2290. doi:10.1101/gr.1413403. PMC 403703. PMID 14525929.
Jump up ^ Mountain, J. L.; Hebert, J. M.; Bhattacharyya, S.; Underhill, P. A.; Ottolenghi, C.; Gadgil, M.; Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. (1995). "Demographic history of India and mtDNA-sequence diversity". American Journal of Human Genetics 56 (4): 979C992. PMC 1801212. PMID 7717409.
Jump up ^ Thanseem, I.; Thangaraj, K.; Chaubey, G.; Singh, V.; Bhaskar, L. V. S.; Reddy, B. M.; Reddy, A. G.; Singh, L. (2006). "Genetic affinities among the lower castes and tribal groups of India: Inference from Y chromosome and mitochondrial DNA". BMC Genetics 7: 42. doi:10.1186/1471-2156-7-42. PMC 1569435. PMID 16893451.
Jump up ^ Brian Handwerk (10 January 2006). "India Acquired Language, Not Genes, From West, Study Says". National Geographic. Retrieved 8 December 2006.
Jump up ^ Indians are one people descended from two tribes. Dnaindia.com (25 September 2009). Retrieved 11 December 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Leupp, p. 52
^ Jump up to: a b c Leupp, p. 49
Jump up ^ N. K. Mishra; Sabita Tripathy (2002). A Critical Response to Indian English Literature. Atlantic Publishers & Dist. pp. 59, 65, 68. ISBN 8126900822. Retrieved June 1, 2006.
Jump up ^ Fisher, M. H. (2007). "Excluding and Including "Natives of India": Early-Nineteenth-Century British-Indian Race Relations in Britain". Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle East 27 (2): 301C312. doi:10.1215/1089201x-2007-007.
Jump up ^ Tambe, A. (2005). "The Elusive Ingenue: A Transnational Feminist Analysis of European Prostitution in Colonial Bombay". Gender & Society 19 (2): 160C179. doi:10.1177/0891243204272781.
Jump up ^ Enloe, Cynthia H. (2000). Maneuvers: The International Politics of Militarizing Women's Lives. University of California Press. p. 58. ISBN 0-520-22071-4.
Jump up ^ Kent, Eliza F. (2004). Converting Women. Oxford University Press US. pp. 85C6. ISBN 0-19-516507-1.
Jump up ^ Kaul, S. (1996). "Colonial figures and postcolonial reading". Diacritics 26: 74C89. doi:10.1353/dia.1996.0005.
Jump up ^ Carter, Sarah (1997). Capturing Women: The Manipulation of Cultural Imagery in Canada's Prairie West. McGill-Queen's University Press. p. 17. ISBN 0-7735-1656-5.
Jump up ^ Loomba, Ania (1998). Colonialism-postcolonialism. Routledge. pp. 79C80. ISBN 0-415-12809-9.
^ Jump up to: a b Muslim Communities in Myanmar. ColorQ World
Jump up ^ CHOWDHURY, RITA (November 18, 2012). "The Assamese Chinese story". The Hindu (Chennai, India). Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Das, Gaurav (Oct 22, 2013). "Tracing roots from Hong Kong to Assam". The Times of India. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ editor (December 8, 2010). "CHINESE-ASSAMESE: How To Stay Silent In Chinese". Manipur Online. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ MITRA, DOLA (Nov 29, 2010). "How To Stay Silent In Chinese". Outlook. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Sharma, Anup (22 October 2013). "HOMECOMING: CHINESE TO REVISIT BIRTHPLACE IN ASSAM". the pioneer (Guwahati). Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ "HOMECOMING: CHINESE TO REVISIT BIRTHPLACE IN ASSAM". The Telegraph, calcutta, india (Calcutta, India). April 18, 2010. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assamese of Chinese origin facing severe identity crisis". oneindia. Updated: Sunday, May 17, 2015, 15:28 [IST]. Retrieved May 17, 2014. Check date values in: |date= (help)
Jump up ^ Bora, Bijay Sankar (Posted at: May 25, 2015 1:38AM). "Taunted as spies, China war victims seethe silently". The Tribune (Guwahati). Retrieved May 17, 2014. Check date values in: |date= (help)
Jump up ^ TALUKDAR, SUSHANTA (November 8, 2010). "Assamese of Chinese origin can visit State: Gogoi". The Hindu (GUWAHATI). Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ leon (2010-04-29). "Sino-Indian war in 1962 C Bitter Memories". Dhapa. May 17, 2014
Jump up ^ Sarat Ch; ra Roy (Rai Bahadur), eds. (1959). Man in India, Volume 39. A. K. Bose. p. 309. Retrieved 2 March 2012. d: TAMIL-CHINESE CROSSES IN THE NILGIRIS, MADRAS. S. S. Sarkar* (Received on 21 September 1959) DURING May 1959, while working on the blood groups of the Kotas of the Nilgiri Hills in the village of Kokal in Gudalur, inquiries were made regarding the present position of the Tamil-Chinese cross described by Thurston (1909). It may be recalled here that Thurston reported the above cross resulting from the union of some Chinese convicts, deported from the Straits Settlement, and local Tamil Paraiyan
Jump up ^ Edgar Thurston; K. Rangachari (1909). Castes and tribes of southern India, Volume 2 (PDF). Government press. p. 99. Archived from the original on June 21, 2013. Retrieved 2 March 2012. 99 CHINESE-TAMIL CROSS in the Nilgiri jail. It is recorded * that, in 1868, twelve of the Chinamen " broke out during a very stormy night, and parties of armed police were sent out to scour the hills for them. They were at last arrested in Malabar a fortnight
Jump up ^ Government Museum (Madras, India) (1897). Bulletin , Volumes 2C3. MADRAS: Printed by the Superintendent, Govt. Press. p. 31. Retrieved 2 March 2012. ON A CHINESE-TAMIL CKOSS. Halting in the course of a recent anthropological expedition on the western side of the Nilgiri plateau, in the midst of the Government Cinchona plantations, I came across a small settlement of Chinese, who have squatted for some years on the slopes of the hills between Naduvatam and Gudalur, and developed, as the result of 'marriage' with Tamil pariah women, into a colony, earning an honest livelihood by growing vegetables, cultivating cofl'ce on a small scale, and adding to their income from these sources by the economic products of the cow. An ambassador was sent to this miniature Chinese Court with a suggestion that the men should, in return for monies, present themselves before me with a view to their measurements being recorded. The reply which came back was in its way racially characteristic as between Hindus and Chinese. In the case of the former, permission to make use of their bodies for the purposes of research depends essentially on a pecuniary transaction, on a scale varying from two to eight annas. The Chinese, on the other hand, though poor, sent a courteous message to the effect that they did not require payment in money, but would be perfectly happy if I would give them, as a memento, copies of their photographs. The measurements of a single family, excepting a widowed daughter whom I was not permitted to see, and an infant in arms, who was pacified with cake while I investigated its mother, are recorded in the following table:
Jump up ^ Edgar Thurston (2004). Badagas and Irulas of Nilgiris, Paniyans of Malabar: A Cheruman Skull, Kuruba Or Kurumba C Summary of Results. Volume 2, Issue 1 of Bulletin (Government Museum (Madras, India)). Asian Educational Services. p. 31. ISBN 81-206-1857-2. Retrieved 2 March 2012.
Jump up ^ Government Museum (Madras, India) (1897). Bulletin ... 2C3. Madras: Printed by the Superintendent, Govt. Press. p. 32. Retrieved 2 March 2012.
Jump up ^ Edgar Thurston (2004). Badagas and Irulas of Nilgiris, Paniyans of Malabar: A Cheruman Skull, Kuruba Or Kurumba C Summary of Results. Volume 2, Issue 1 of Bulletin (Government Museum (Madras, India)). Asian Educational Services. p. 32. ISBN 81-206-1857-2. Retrieved 2 March 2012.
Jump up ^ Edgar Thurston; K. Rangachari (1987). Castes and Tribes of Southern India (illustrated ed.). Asian Educational Services. pp. 98C99. ISBN 81-206-0288-9. Retrieved 2 March 2012.
Jump up ^ Government Museum (Madras, India), Edgar Thurston (1897). Note on tours along the Malabar coast. Volumes 2-3 of Bulletin, Government Museum (Madras, India). Superintendent, Government Press. p. 31. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
Jump up ^ Sarat Chandra Roy (Rai Bahadur) (1954). Man in India, Volume 34, Issue 4. A.K. Bose. p. 273. Retrieved 2 March 2012. Thurston found the Chinese element to be predominant among the offspring as will be evident from his description. 'The mother was a typical dark-skinned Tamil Paraiyan. The colour of the children was more closely allied to the yellowish
Jump up ^ Mahadeb Prasad Basu (1990). An anthropological study of bodily height of Indian population. Punthi Pustak. p. 84. Retrieved 2 March 2012. Sarkar (1959) published a pedigree showing Tamil-Chinese-English crosses in a place located in the Nilgiris. Thurston (1909) mentioned an instance of a mating between a Chinese male with a Tamil Pariah female. Man (Deka 1954) described
Jump up ^ Sarat Ch; ra Roy (Rai Bahadur), eds. (1959). Man in India, Volume 39. A. K. Bose. p. 309. Retrieved 2 March 2012. d: TAMIL-CHINESE CROSSES IN THE NILGIRIS, MADRAS. S. S. Sarkar* (Received on 21 September 1959) iURING May 1959, while working on the blood groups of the Kotas of the Nilgiri Hills in the village of Kokal in Gudalur, enquiries were made regarding the present position of the Tamil-Chinese cross described by Thurston (1909). It may be recalled here that Thurston reported the above cross resulting from the union of some Chinese convicts, deported from the Straits Settlement, and local Tamil Paraiyan
Jump up ^ Leupp, p. 53
Jump up ^ Leupp, p. 48
Jump up ^ Leupp, p. 50
Jump up ^ Michael S. Laver (2011). The Sakoku Edicts and the Politics of Tokugawa Hegemony. Cambria Press. p. 152. ISBN 1-60497-738-8. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
Jump up ^ HOFFMAN, MICHAEL (May 26, 2013). "The rarely, if ever, told story of Japanese sold as slaves by Portuguese traders". The Japan Times. Retrieved 2014-03-02.
Jump up ^ "Europeans had Japanese slaves, in case you didnt know". Japan Probe. May 10, 2007. Retrieved 2014-03-02.
Jump up ^ Nelson, Thomas (Winter 2004). "Monumenta Nipponica (Slavery in Medieval Japan)" 59 (No. 4). Sophia University.: 463. JSTOR 25066328.
Jump up ^ Monumenta Nipponica: Studies on Japanese Culture, Past and Present, Volume 59, Issues 3-4. Jchi Daigaku. Sophia University. 2004. p. 463. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
Jump up ^ Michael Weiner, ed. (2004). Race, Ethnicity and Migration in Modern Japan: Imagined and imaginary minorites (illustrated ed.). Taylor & Francis. p. 408. ISBN 0-415-20857-2. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
Jump up ^ Kwame Anthony Appiah, Henry Louis Gates, Jr., eds. (2005). Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American Experience (illustrated ed.). Oxford University Press. p. 479. ISBN 0-19-517055-5. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
Jump up ^ Anthony Appiah, Henry Louis Gates, eds. (2010). Encyclopedia of Africa, Volume 1 (illustrated ed.). Oxford University Press. p. 187. ISBN 0-19-533770-0. Retrieved 2014-02-02.
Jump up ^ "The National Eugenic Law" The 107th law that Japanese Government promulgated in 1940() |z|||, Kimura, Jurisprudence in Genetics
Jump up ^ Robertson, J. (2002). "Blood talks: Eugenic modernity and the creation of new Japanese" (PDF). History and anthropology 13 (3): 191C216 (205C206). doi:10.1080/0275720022000025547. PMID 19499628.
Jump up ^ Yuki Tanaka, Hidden Horrors, Japanese War Crimes in World War II, 1996, pp. 94C98., Evidence documenting sex-slaves coercion revealed, "An estimated 200,000 to 300,000 women across Asia, predominantly Korean and Chinese, are believed to have been forced to work as sex slaves in Japanese military brothels", BBC 8 December 2000;
"Historians say thousands of women C as many as 200,000 by some accounts C mostly from Korea, China and Japan worked in the Japanese military brothels", Irish Examiner 8 March 2007;
AP 7 March 2007;
CNN 29 March 2001
Jump up ^ Herbert Bix, Hirohito and the Making of Modern Japan, 2001, p. 538, citing Kinkabara Samon and Takemae Eiji, Showashi : kokumin no naka no haran to gekido no hanseiki-zohoban, 1989, p. 244.
^ Jump up to: a b A Heterology of American GIs during World War II by Xavier Guillaume, Department of Political Science, University of Geneva July 2003, (H-NET review of Peter Schrijvers. "The GI War against Japan: American Soldiers in Asia and the Pacific during World War II". New York: New York University Press, 2002) The citation is cited to page 212 of "The GI War against Japan".
Jump up ^ Molasky, Michael S. (1999). The American Occupation of Japan and Okinawa: Literature and Memory. p. 16. ISBN 978-0-415-19194-4.
Jump up ^ Molasky, Michael S.; Rabson, Steve (2000). Southern Exposure: Modern Japanese Literature from Okinawa. p. 22. ISBN 978-0-8248-2300-9.
Jump up ^ Sheehan, Susan D; Elizabeth, Laura; Selden, Hein Mark. "Islands of Discontent: Okinawan Responses to Japanese and American Power": 18.
Jump up ^ Ijime: A Social Illness of Japan by Akiko Dogakinai. Lclark.edu (26 December 1994). Retrieved 11 December 2011.
Jump up ^ "Press Conference by Mr Doudou Dine, Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights". Retrieved 5 January 2007.
Jump up ^ "Japan racism 'deep and profound". BBC News (11 July 2005). Retrieved 5 January 2007.
Jump up ^ Aso says Japan is nation of 'one race', The Japan Times, 18 October 2005
Jump up ^ McLelland 2010, p. 518.
Jump up ^ McLelland 2010, p. 529.
Jump up ^ McLelland 2010, pp. 519C520.
Jump up ^ "Muslim society in Korea is developing and growing". Pravda. 6 November 2002. Retrieved 23 December 2008.
Jump up ^ Grayson, James Huntley (2002). Korea: A Religious History. Routledge. p. 195. ISBN 0-7007-1605-X.
Jump up ^ Baker, Don (Winter 2006). "Islam Struggles for a Toehold in Korea". Harvard Asia Quarterly. Retrieved 23 April 2007.
Jump up ^ "????". Rootsinfo.co.kr (Korean language). Retrieved 20 March 2006.
Jump up ^ Eui-Young Yu and Earl H. Phillips, Korean Women in Transition: At Home and Abroad, Center for Korean-American and Korean Studies, California State University, Los Angeles, 1987, p. 185 ISBN 0-942831-00-4.
Jump up ^ Japan PM: Moving US base impossible CCTV News C CNTV English. (5 May 2010) Retrieved 29 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Hae-in, Shin (3 August 2006). "Korea Greets New Era of Multiculturalism". The Korea Herald. Retrieved 15 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Lee, H. K. (2008). "International marriage and the state in South Korea: Focusing on governmental policy". Citizenship Studies 12: 107C123. doi:10.1080/13621020701794240.
Jump up ^ Hye-Kyung Lee (2008). "International Marriage and the State in South Korea|" (PDF). Citizenship Studies 12: 107C123. doi:10.1080/13621020701794240. Retrieved 22 December 2008.
Jump up ^ Korea's ethnic nationalism is a source of both pride and prejudice, according to Gi-Wook Shin. Aparc.stanford.edu. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
Jump up ^ Park Chung Myth of Pure-Blood Nationalism Blocks Multi-Ethnic Society. The Korean Times. 14 August 2006
Jump up ^ "'???'(Kosian) ?? ??! (Do not use Kosian)". Naver news (in Korean) February 23, 2006. Retrieved 4 March 2006. See English-language reaction on The Marmot's Hole
Jump up ^ Do not use the new word Kosian, AMNESTY International South Korea Section, 2006, 07.
Jump up ^ "Ward's Win Brings 'Race' to the Fore". Korea Times. 9 February 2006. Archived from the original on 21 May 2009. Retrieved 4 March 2006.
Jump up ^ "For mixed-race children in Korea, happiness is too far away". Yonhap News. Retrieved 4 March 2006.
Jump up ^ S. Koreans Reclaim Biracial Football Champion as One of Them, Los Angeles Times, 13 February 2006
Jump up ^ Reid, Anthony (1990). Southeast Asia in the Age of Commerce, 1450C1680: The lands below the winds. Volume 1 of Southeast Asia in the Age of Commerce, 1450C1680 (illustrated, reprint, revised ed.). New Haven: Yale University Press. p. 165. ISBN 0-300-04750-9. Retrieved December 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ MacLeod, Murdo J.; Rawski, Evelyn Sakakida, eds. (1998). European Intruders and Changes in Behaviour and Customs in Africa, America, and Asia Before 1800. Volume 30 of An Expanding World, the European Impact on World History, 1450C1800 , Vol 30 (illustrated, reprint ed.). Ashgate. p. 636. ISBN 0-86078-522-X. Retrieved December 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ Hughes, Sarah S.; Hughes, Brady, eds. (1995). Women in World History: Readings from prehistory to 1500. Volume 1 of Sources and studies in world history (illustrated ed.). M.E. Sharpe. p. 219. ISBN 1-56324-311-3. Retrieved December 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ Tingley, Nancy (2009). Asia Society. Museum, ed. Arts of Ancient Viet Nam: From River Plain to Open Sea. Andreas Reinecke, Museum of Fine Arts, Houston (illustrated ed.). Asia Society. p. 249. ISBN 0-300-14696-5. Retrieved December 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ Hamilton, Alexander (1997). Smithies, Michael, ed. Alexander Hamilton: A Scottish Sea Captain in Southeast Asia, 1689C1723 (illustrated, reprint ed.). Silkworm Books. p. 205. ISBN 9747100452. Retrieved December 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ Daniels, Timothy P. (2005). Building Cultural Nationalism in Malaysia. Routledge. p. 189. ISBN 0-415-94971-8.
Jump up ^ Yegar, Moshe (1972). The Muslims of Burma: a Study of a Minority Group. Schriftenreihe des Sdasien-Instituts der Universit?t Heidelberg. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. p. 6. ISBN 3-447-01357-5. OCLC 185556301.
Jump up ^ Lay, Pathi U Ko (1973). "Twentieth Anniversary Special Edition of Islam Damma Beikman". Myanmar Pyi and Islamic religion: 109C11.
Jump up ^ T. V. Sanjiva Row; Pinayur Ramanatha Aiyar; Palangamal Hari Rao (1912). The All India Digest, Section Ii (civil), 1811-1911, Volume 2. T.A. Venkasawmy Row and T.S. Krishnasawmy Row. p. 577. Retrieved May 17, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b Thangaraj, K.; Singh, L.; Reddy, A. G.; Rao, V. R.; Sehgal, S. C.; Underhill, P. A.; et al. (2003). "Genetic Affinities of the Andaman Islanders, a Vanishing Human Population". Current Biology 13 (2): 86C93. doi:10.1016/S0960-9822(02)01336-2. PMID 12546781.
^ Jump up to: a b :: Overseas Compatriot Affairs Commission, R.O.C. ::. Ocac.gov.tw (24 August 2004). Retrieved 14 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Historical Timeline Of The Royal Sultanate Of Sulu Including Related Events Of Neighboring Peoplesby Josiah C. Seasite.niu.edu (30 August 2000). Retrieved 14 August 2010.
Jump up ^ the non-Jewish members of the European Volk are Aryans. . . .
Eric Ehrenreich. The Nazi Ancestral Proof: Genealogy, Racial Science, and the Final Solution. Indiana University Press. pp. 9, 10. ISBN 978-0-253-11687-1.
Jump up ^ S. H. Milton (2001). ""Gypsies" as social outsiders in Nazi Germany". In Robert Gellately; Nathan Stoltzfus. Social Outsiders in Nazi Germany. Princeton University Press. pp. 216, 231. ISBN 978-0-691-08684-2.
Jump up ^ Meldungen aus dem Reich: Auswahl aus den geheimen Lageberichten des Sicherheitsdienstes der SS 1939C1944 (11965; Reports from the Reich: Selection from the secret reviews of the situation of the SS 1939C1944; 1984 extended to 14 vols.), Heinz Boberach (ed. and compilator), Munich: Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag (dtv), 21968, (dtv-dokumente; vol. 477) p. 208. ISBN B0000BSLXR
Jump up ^ The earlier deportations of Jews and Gentiles of Jewish descent from Austria and Pomerania (both to occupied Poland) as well as Baden and the Palatinate (both to occupied France) had remained a spontaneous episode.
Jump up ^ At the Wannsee Conference the participants decided to include persons classified as Jews, but married to persons classified as Aryans, however, only after a divorce. In October 1943 an act, facilitating compulsory divorce imposed by the state, was ready for appointment, however, Hitler never granted the competent referees an audience. Pressure by the NSDAP headquarters in early 1944 also failed. Cf. Uwe Dietrich Adam, Judenpolitik im Dritten Reich, Dsseldorf: 2003, pp. 222C234. ISBN 3-7700-4063-5
Jump up ^ Beate Meyer, Die Verfolgung und Ermordung der Hamburger Juden 1933C1945, Landeszentrale fr politische Bildung (ed.), Hamburg: Landeszentrale fr politische Bildung, 2006, p. 83. ISBN 3-929728-85-0
Jump up ^ In summer 1945 all in all 8,000 Berliners whom the Nazis had classified as Jews because of 3 or 4 grandparents survived. Their personal faith C like Jewish, Protestant, Catholic or irreligionist C is mostly not recorded, since only the Nazi files which use the Nazi racial definitions report on them. 4,700 out of the 8,000 survived due to their living in a mixed marriage. 1,400 survived hiding, out of 5,000 who tried. 1,900 had returned from Theresienstadt. Cf. Hans-Rainer Sandvo?, Widerstand in Wedding und Gesundbrunnen, Gedenkst?tte Deutscher Widerstand (ed.), Berlin: Gedenkst?tte Deutscher Widerstand, 2003, (Schriftenreihe ber den Widerstand in Berlin von 1933 bis 1945; No. 14), p. 302. ISSN 0175-3592
^ Jump up to: a b Diemut Majer (2003). "Non-Germans" Under the Third Reich: The Nazi Judicial and Administrative System in Germany and Occupied Eastern Europe with Special Regard to Occupied Poland, 1939-1945. JHU Press. p. 180. ISBN 978-0-8018-6493-3.
Jump up ^ Majer, "Non-Germans" Under the Third Reich, p.369
Jump up ^ Leila J. Rupp, Mobilizing Women for War, p 125, ISBN 0-691-04649-2
Jump up ^ Robert Edwin Hertzstein, The War That Hitler Won p139 ISBN 0-399-11845-4
Jump up ^ Nazi Ideology and the Holocaust. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. January 2007. p. 58. ISBN 978-0-89604-712-9.
Jump up ^ Majer, "Non-Germans" Under the Third Reich, p.855
Jump up ^ Cf. the Bundesgesetz ber die Anerkennung freier Ehen (as of 23 June 1950, Federal law on recognition of free marriages).
Jump up ^ Origins and Language. Source: U.S. Library of Congress.  This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain.
^ Jump up to: a b A Country Study: Hungary. Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. ISBN 0-16-029202-6. Retrieved 6 March 2009.
Jump up ^ Jzsa Hvizi Autonomies in Europe and Hungary. (PDF). Corvinus Society (2004)
Jump up ^ National and historical symbols of Hungary. Nemzetijelkepek.hu. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
Jump up ^ Braham, Randolph L. A Magyarorszgi Holokauszt F?ldrajzi Enciklopedija [The Geographic Encyclopedia of the Holocaust in Hungary]. Budapest:Park Publishing, 3 vol. (2006), Vol 1, Borsod
Jump up ^ Kees Versteegh, et al. Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics, BRILL, 2006.
Jump up ^ Izquierdo Labrado, Julio. "La esclavitud en Huelva y Palos (1570C1587)" (in Spanish). Retrieved 14 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Salloum, Habeeb. "The impact of the Arabic language and culture on English and other European languages". The Honorary Consulate of Syria. Retrieved 14 July 2008.
Jump up ^ "Real Academia Espa?ola". Archived from the original on 4 July 2012. Retrieved 9 December 2009.
Jump up ^ Robert Lacey (1983), Aristocrats, p. 67, Little, Brown and Company
Jump up ^ de Larramendi, Manuel Corografa de la muy noble y muy leal provincia de Guipzcoa, Bilbao, 1986, facsimile edition of that from Editorial Ekin, Buenos Aires, 1950. (Also published by Tellechea Idgoras, San Sebastin, 1969.) Quoted in La idea de Espa?a entre los vascos de la Edad Moderna, by Jon Arrieta Alberdi, Anales 1997C1998, Real Sociedad Econmica Valenciana de Amigos del Pas
Jump up ^ Limpieza de sangre in the Spanish-language Au?amendi Encyclopedia
^ Jump up to: a b Adams, S. M.; Bosch, E.; Balaresque, P. L.; Ballereau, S. P. J.; Lee, A. C.; Arroyo, E.; Lpez-Parra, A. M.; Aler, M.; Grifo, M. S. G. (2008). "The Genetic Legacy of Religious Diversity and Intolerance: Paternal Lineages of Christians, Jews, and Muslims in the Iberian Peninsula". The American Journal of Human Genetics 83 (6): 725C736. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.11.007. PMC 2668061. PMID 19061982.
Jump up ^ Flores, Carlos; Maca-Meyer, Nicole; Gonzlez, Ana M; Oefner, Peter J; Shen, Peidong; Prez, Jose A; Rojas, Antonio; Larruga, Jose M; Underhill, Peter A (2004). "Reduced genetic structure of the Iberian peninsula revealed by Y-chromosome analysis: Implications for population demography". European Journal of Human Genetics 12 (10): 855C63. doi:10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201225. PMID 15280900.
Jump up ^ Gonzlez, AM; Brehm, A; Prez, JA; Maca-Meyer, N; Flores, C; Cabrera, VM (2003). "Mitochondrial DNA affinities at the Atlantic fringe of Europe". American Journal of Physical Anthropology 120 (4): 391C404. doi:10.1002/ajpa.10168. PMID 12627534.
Jump up ^ Giacomo, F.; Luca, F.; Popa, L. O.; Akar, N.; Anagnou, N.; Banyko, J.; Brdicka, R.; Barbujani, G.; Papola, F.; et al. (2004). "Y chromosomal haplogroup J as a signature of the post-neolithic colonization of Europe". Human Genetics 115 (5): 357C71. doi:10.1007/s00439-004-1168-9. PMID 15322918.
Jump up ^ Sutton, WK; Knight, A; Underhill, PA; Neulander, JS; Disotell, TR; Mountain, JL (2006). "Toward resolution of the debate regarding purported crypto-Jews in a spanish-American population: Evidence from the Y chromosome". Annals of Human Biology 33 (1): 100C11. doi:10.1080/03014460500475870. PMID 16500815.
Jump up ^ Zalloua, Pierre A.; Platt, Daniel E.; El Sibai, Mirvat; Khalife, Jade; Makhoul, Nadine; Haber, Marc; Xue, Yali; Izaabel, Hassan; Bosch, Elena; et al. (2008). "Identifying Genetic Traces of Historical Expansions: Phoenician Footprints in the Mediterranean". The American Journal of Human Genetics 83 (5): 633C42. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.10.012. PMC 2668035. PMID 18976729.
Jump up ^ "La cifra de los sefardes puede estar sobreestimada, ya que en estos genes hay mucha diversidad y quiz absorbieron otros genes de Oriente Medio" ("The Sephardic result may be overestimated, since there is much diversity in those genes and maybe absorbed other genes from the Middle East"). ?Pone en duda Calafell la validez de los tests de ancestros? "Estn bien para los americanos, nosotros ya sabemos de dnde venimos" (Puts Calafell in doubt the validity of ancestry tests? "They can be good for the Americans, we already know from where we come from)" Yanes, Javier (4 December 2008) Tres culturas en el ADN. publico.es
Jump up ^ Saey, Tina Hesman (January 3, 2009). "Spanish Inquisition couldnt quash Moorish, Jewish genes". ScienceNews 175: 1. doi:10.1002/scin.2009.5591750111. We think it might be an over estimate .. The genetic makeup of Sephardic Jews is probably common to other Middle Eastern populations, such as the Phoenicians, that also settled the Iberian Peninsula, Calafell says. In our study, that would have all fallen under the Jewish label
Jump up ^ "El doctor Calafell matiza que (...) los marcadores genticos usados para distinguir a la poblacin con ancestros sefardes pueden producir distorsiones". "ese 20% de espa?oles que el estudio se?ala como descendientes de sefardes podran haber heredado ese rasgo de movimiento ms antiguos, como el de los fenicios o, incluso, primeros pobladores neolticos hace miles de a?os." "Dr. Calafell clarifies that (...) the genetic markers used to distinguish the population with Sephardim ancestry may produce distortions. The 20% of Spaniards that are identified as having Sephardim ancestry in the study could have inherited that same marker from older movements like the Phoenicians, or even the first Neolithic settlers thousands of years ago" Caceres, Pedro (4 December 2008) Uno de cada tres espa?oles tiene marcadores genticos de Oriente Medio o el Magreb. elmundo.es
Jump up ^ Spanish Inquisition left genetic legacy in Iberia , New Scientist, 4 December 2008.
Jump up ^ Capelli, Cristian; Onofri, Valerio; Brisighelli, Francesca; Boschi, Ilaria; Scarnicci, Francesca; Masullo, Mara; Ferri, Gianmarco; Tofanelli, Sergio; et al. (2009). "Moors and Saracens in Europe: Estimating the medieval North African male legacy in southern Europe". European Journal of Human Genetics 17 (6): 848C52. doi:10.1038/ejhg.2008.258. PMC 2947089. PMID 19156170.
Jump up ^ Emma Blake, Emma (2008). "The Familiar Honeycomb: Byzantine Era Reuse of Sicily's Prehistoric Rock-Cut Tombs". In Ruth M. Van Dyke, Susan E. Alcock. Archaeologies of Memory. Blackwell Publishers. p. 201. doi:10.1002/9780470774304.ch10. ISBN 978-0-470-77430-4.
Jump up ^ Alex E. Felice, "Genetic origin of contemporary Maltese," The Sunday Times (of Malta), 5 August 2007, last visited 5 August 2007
Jump up ^ Italian women win cash for wartime rapes. Listserv.acsu.buffalo.edu. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
Jump up ^ "1952: Il caso delle "marocchinate" al Parlamento". Retrieved 22 November 2008.
Jump up ^ Gribanova, Lyubov "-  :   " (in Russian). Nashi Deti Project. Retrieved 25 February 2010.
Jump up ^ See generally Jay Winik (2007), The Great Upheaval.
Jump up ^ Donald Quataert (2000). The Ottoman Empire, 1700C1922. New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 2. ISBN 0-521-63328-1.
Jump up ^ "The sultanate of women". Channel 4. Retrieved 30 January 2010.
Jump up ^ "The Ottoman Empires Life-or-Death Race". Smithsonian. March 22, 2012
Jump up ^ "Most Britons are descended from male farmers who left Iraq and Syria 10,000 years ago (and seduced the local hunter-gatherer women)". Daily Mail (London).
Jump up ^ Anglo-Indians. Movinghere.org.uk. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
Jump up ^ Asians in Britain: Their Social, Cultural and Political Lives. Fathom.com. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
Jump up ^ Fisher, Michael Herbert (2006). Counterflows to Colonialism. Orient Blackswan. ISBN 81-7824-154-4.
Jump up ^ "Inter-Ethnic Marriage: 2% of all Marriages are Inter-Ethnic". National Statistics. 21 March 2005. Retrieved 15 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Bland, L. (2005). "White Women and Men of Colour: Miscegenation Fears in Britain after the Great War". Gender & History 17: 29C61. doi:10.1111/j.0953-5233.2005.00371.x.
Jump up ^ Major new study reveals the rise of mixed-race Britain. Some ethnic groups 'will disappear', The Observer, 18 January 2009
Jump up ^ Islam and slavery: Sexual slavery, BBC, 7 September 2009
Jump up ^ "Horrible Traffic in Circassian WomenInfanticide in Turkey," New York Daily Times, 6 August 1856. Chnm.gmu.edu. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
Jump up ^ Soldier Khan. Avalanchepress.com. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
Jump up ^ ''When europeans were slaves: Research suggests white slavery was much more common than previously believed''. Researchnews.osu.edu. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
Jump up ^ Davis, Robert. Christian Slaves, Muslim Masters: White Slavery in the Mediterranean, the Barbary Coast and Italy, 1500C1800. Based on "records for 27,233 voyages that set out to obtain slaves for the Americas". Stephen Behrendt, "Transatlantic Slave Trade", Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American Experience (New York: Basic Civitas Books, 1999), ISBN 0-465-00071-1.
Jump up ^ Ulrich Marzolph, Richard van Leeuwen, Hassan Wassouf (2004). The Arabian Nights Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. pp. 289C90. ISBN 1-57607-204-5.
Jump up ^ Ulrich Marzolph, Richard van Leeuwen, Hassan Wassouf (2004). The Arabian Nights Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. pp. 172C4. ISBN 1-57607-204-5.
^ Jump up to: a b Richards, M.; Rengo, C.; Cruciani, F.; Gratrix, F.; Wilson, J. F.; Scozzari, R.; MacAulay, V.; Torroni, A. (2003). "Extensive Female-Mediated Gene Flow from Sub-Saharan Africa into Near Eastern Arab Populations". The American Journal of Human Genetics 72 (4): 1058C1064. doi:10.1086/374384. PMC 1180338. PMID 12629598.
Jump up ^ Zentall, S. (1975). "Optimal stimulation as theoretical basis of hyperactivity". The American journal of orthopsychiatry 45 (4): 549C563. doi:10.1111/j.1939-0025.1975.tb01185.x. PMID 1180338.
Jump up ^ John Lewis Burckhardt (2005) [1829]. "Description of a Journey from Upper Egypt through the Deserts of Nubia to Berber and Suakin, and from thence to Djidda in Arabia. Performed in the Year 1814.". Travels in Nubia. The University of Adelaide Library.
Jump up ^ "Crusaders 'left genetic legacy'". BBC News. 27 March 2008.
Jump up ^ United Arab Emirates, US Department of State
Jump up ^ Protection Act of 2000: Trafficking in Persons Report 2007, US Department of State
Jump up ^ Country Narratives: Near East, US Department of State
Jump up ^ Azoulay, Yuval. "Justice Ministry drafts civil marriage law for 'refuseniks'". Haaretz.
Jump up ^ "75 Percent of Israeli Jews Oppose Intermarriage, New Poll Says". The Jewish Daily Forward. 22 August 2014. Retrieved 24 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "'Protecting' Jewish girls from Arabs". Jerusalem Post. 18 September 2009.
Jump up ^ Cook, Jonathan. "Israeli drive to prevent Jewish girls dating Arabs". The National.
Jump up ^ Reider, Dimi (4 February 2010). "Tel Aviv presents: Municipal program to prevent Arab boys from dating Jewish girls". Coteret.
Jump up ^ Sobelman, Batsheba (18 August 2014). "Right-wing extremists can't break the love of a Muslim man and Jewish woman in Israel". smh.com.au. Retrieved 24 August 2014.
Jump up ^ Tpuna, ancestors, grandparents "Mori Dictionary". Retrieved 19 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Sharp, Andrew (1991). Justice and the Mori. Auckland: Oxford University Press. pp. 43C44.
Jump up ^ Spoonley, Paul (1993). Racism and Ethnicity. Auckland: Oxford University Press. pp. 38C46.
Jump up ^ Spoonley, Paul (1993). Racism and Ethnicity. Auckland: Oxford University Press. pp. 38C39.
Jump up ^ "Harawira comments hurt race relations". The New Zealand Herald. NZPA. 4 August 2010. Retrieved 25 October 2011.
Jump up ^ S, Lcia. Rain Forest Literatures: Amazonian Texts and Latin American Culture. Minneapolis, Minnesota: U of Minnesota Press, 2004. ISBN 978-0-8166-4325-7
Jump up ^ Hispanic Origin and Race of Coupled Households: 2000 U.S. Census. Retrieved 29 June 2007.
Jump up ^ http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/nation/2007-08-05-interracial-dating_N.htm
Jump up ^ "Table FG4. Married Couple Family Groups, by Presence of Own Children In Specific Age Groups, and Age, Earnings, Education, and Race and Hispanic Origin of Both Spouses: 2010 (thousands)". U.S. Census Bureau.
Jump up ^ After 40 years, interracial marriage flourishing. Msnbc.com. 15 April 2007.
Jump up ^ Degrading Stereotypes Ruin Dating Experience. Modelminority.com (22 October 2002). Retrieved 11 December 2011.
Jump up ^ Jeffrey S. Passel, Wendy Wang and Paul Taylor Marrying Out: One-in-Seven New U.S. Marriages Is Interracial or Interethnic. (PDF). Pew Research Center. 4 June 2010
Jump up ^ McClain DaCosta, Kimberly (2007). Making multiracials: state, family, and market in the redrawing of the color line. Stanford University Press. p. 9. ISBN 0-8047-5546-9.
Jump up ^ Langhorne Folan, Karyn (2010). Don't Bring Home a White Boy: And Other Notions That Keep Black Women from Dating Out. Simon and Schuster. p. 11. ISBN 1-4391-5475-9.
Jump up ^ Staples, Robert (2006). Exploring black sexuality. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 124. ISBN 0-7425-4659-4.
Jump up ^ "New generation doesn't blink at interracial relationships". USA Today (2 August 2006).
Jump up ^ "Most Americans Approve of Interracial Dating". Gallup.com. 7 October 2005.
Jump up ^ "Interracial and Cross Cultural Dating of Generation Y". St. Cloud State University.
Jump up ^ "In online dating, blacks more open to romancing whites than vice versa". Berkely.edu February 11, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Love Isnt Color-Blind: White Online Daters Spurn Blacks". healthland.time.com 22 February. 2011
Jump up ^ Jordan, Miriam (17 February 2012). "More Marriages Cross Race, Ethnicity Lines". The Wall Street Journal (Theosophical University Press). Retrieved 18 February 2012.
Jump up ^ Yen, Hope (26 May 2010). "Interracial Marriage Still Rising, But Not As Fast: Report". Huffington Post. AP.
Jump up ^ "Marrying Out". Jeffrey S. Passel, Wendy Wang and Paul Taylor, Pew Research Center. 4 June 2010.
^ Jump up to: a b Bratter, J. L.; King, R. B. (2008). ""But Will It Last?": Marital Instability Among Interracial and Same-Race Couples". Family Relations 57 (2): 160C171. doi:10.1111/j.1741-3729.2008.00491.x.
Jump up ^ Escssia, F. (23 October 2000) "Casamento reflete discrimina??o racial." Folha de S.Paulo.
^ Jump up to: a b c Chasteen, John Charles; Wood, James A (2003). Problems in modern Latin American history, sources and interpretations. Sr Books. pp. 4C10. ISBN 0-8420-5060-4.
Jump up ^ Sweet, Frank W. (31 July 2005). Legal History of the Color Line: The Notion of Invisible Blackness. Backintyme Publishing. p. 542. ISBN 0-939479-23-0.
Jump up ^ Sweet, Frank W. (8 June 2004). "Afro-European Genetic Admixture in the United States". Essays on the Color Line and the One-Drop Rule. Backintyme Essays. Retrieved 13 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Stuckert, Robert P. (May 1908). "African Ancestry of the White American Population" (PDF). The Ohio Journal of Science 58 (3): 155. Retrieved 13 July 2008.
Jump up ^ "Interracial Dating & Marriage". asian-nation.org. Retrieved 30 August 2007.
Jump up ^ "Multiracial / Hapa Asian Americans". asian-nation.org. Retrieved 30 August 2007.
Jump up ^ CIA Factbook. Cia.gov. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
Jump up ^ Mexico. Encyclop?dia Britannica
Jump up ^ Fejerman, L.; Carnese, F. R.; Goicoechea, A. S.; Avena, S. A.; Dejean, C. B.; Ward, R. H. (2005). "African ancestry of the population of Buenos Aires". American Journal of Physical Anthropology 128 (1): 164C170. doi:10.1002/ajpa.20083. PMID 15714513.
Jump up ^ Aidi, Hisham (2 April 2002). "Blacks in Argentina: Disappearing Acts". History Notes. The Global African Community. Retrieved 13 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Skidmore, Thomas E. (April 1992). "Fact and Myth: Discovering a Racial Problem in Brazil" (PDF). Working Paper 173.
Jump up ^ Brasil perde brancos e pretos e ganha 3,2 milh?es de pardos. Noticias.uol.com.br (18 September 2009). Retrieved 11 December 2011.
Jump up ^ Martnez Marignac, Vernica L.; Bianchi Nstor O.; Bertoni Bernardo; Parra Esteban J. (2004). "Characterization of Admixture in an Urban Sample from Buenos Aires, Argentina, Using Uniparentally and Biparentally Inherited Genetic Markers". Human Biology 76 (4): 543C57. doi:10.1353/hub.2004.0058. PMID 15754971.
Jump up ^ Gon?alves, V. F.; Prosdocimi F.; Santos L. S.; Ortega J. M.; Pena S. D. J. (9 May 2007). "Sex-biased gene flow in African Americans but not in American Caucasians". Genetics and Molecular Research 6 (2): 256C61. ISSN 1676-5680. PMID 17573655. Retrieved 13 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Alves-Silva, Juliana; da Silva Santos, Magda; Guimar?es, Pedro E. M.; Ferreira, Alessandro C. S.; Bandelt, Hans-Jrgen; Pena, Srgio D. J.; et al. (2000). "The Ancestry of Brazilian mtDNA Lineages". The American Journal of Human Genetics 67 (2): 444C461. doi:10.1086/303004. PMC 1287189. PMID 10873790.
Jump up ^ Salzano, Francisco M.; Ctira Bortolini, Maria (2002). The Evolution and Genetics of Latin American Populations. Cambridge Studies in Biological and Evolutionary Anthropology 28. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 512. ISBN 0-521-65275-8.
Jump up ^ Ferbel, Dr. P. J. "Not Everyone Who Speaks Spanish is from Spain: Tano Survival in the 21st Century Dominican Republic." Kacikie: Journal of Caribbean Amerindian History and Anthropology. . Retrieved 24 September 2009.
Jump up ^ Martnez Cruzado, Juan C. (2002). The Use of Mitochondrial DNA to Discover Pre-Columbian Migrations to the Caribbean:Results for Puerto Rico and Expectations for the Dominican Republic. Kacike: The Journal of Caribbean Amerindian History and Anthropology. Lynne Guitar, Ed. (Retrieved 25 September 2006)
Jump up ^ Pre Colonial Period. geocities.com
Jump up ^ Capelli, C.; Wilson, J. F.; Richards, M.; Stumpf, M. P. H.; Gratrix, F.; Oppenheimer, S.; Underhill, P.; Pascali, V. L.; Ko, T. M.; Goldstein, D. B. (2001). "A Predominantly Indigenous Paternal Heritage for the Austronesian-Speaking Peoples of Insular Southeast Asia and Oceania". The American Journal of Human Genetics 68 (2): 432C443. doi:10.1086/318205. PMC 1235276. PMID 11170891.
^ Jump up to: a b Kalaydjieva, L.; Morar, B.; Chaix, R.; Tang, H. (2005). "A newly discovered founder population: The Roma/Gypsies". BioEssays 27 (10): 1084C1094. doi:10.1002/bies.20287. PMID 16163730.
Jump up ^ Malyarchuk, B. A.; Grzybowski, T.; Derenko, M. V.; Czarny, J.; Miscicka-Sliwka, D. (2006). "Mitochondrial DNA Diversity in the Polish Roma". Annals of Human Genetics 70 (2): 195C206. doi:10.1111/j.1529-8817.2005.00222.x. PMID 16626330.
^ Jump up to: a b c Morar, B.; Gresham, D.; Angelicheva, D.; Tournev, I.; Gooding, R.; Guergueltcheva, V.; et al. (2004). "Mutation History of the Roma/Gypsies". The American Journal of Human Genetics 75 (4): 596C609. doi:10.1086/424759. PMC 1182047. PMID 15322984.
^ Jump up to: a b Kalaydjieva, L.; Gresham, D.; Calafell, F. (2001). "Genetic studies of the Roma (Gypsies): A review". BMC Medical Genetics 2: 5. doi:10.1186/1471-2350-2-5. PMC 31389. PMID 11299048.
Jump up ^ Kalaydjieva, Luba; Gresham, David; Calafell, Francesc (2001). "Genetic studies of the Roma (Gypsies): A review". BMC Medical Genetics 2: 5. doi:10.1186/1471-2350-2-5. PMC 31389. PMID 11299048. Figure 4.
^ Jump up to: a b c Gresham, D; Morar, B; Underhill, P. A.; Passarino, G; Lin, A. A.; Wise, C; et al. (2001), "Origins and Divergence of the Roma (Gypsies)", American Journal of Human Genetics 69 (6): 1314C31, doi:10.1086/324681, PMC 1235543, PMID 11704928, retrieved 2008-06-16
Bibliography[edit]
Christina Miu Bing Cheng (1999). Macau: a cultural Janus. Hong Kong University Press. ISBN 962-209-486-4.
Jo?o de Pina-Cabral (2002). Between China and Europe: person, culture and emotion in Macao. Volume 74 of London School of Economics monographs on social anthropology. Berg. ISBN 0-8264-5749-5.
Leupp, Gary P. (2003). Interracial Intimacy in Japan. Continuum International Publishing Group. ISBN 0-8264-6074-7.
Pan, Lynn (1994), Sons of the Yellow Emperor: A History of the Chinese Diaspora, Kodansha Globe, ISBN 978-1-56836-032-4
Other sources[edit]
Cavanaugh-O'Keefe, John. (23 October 2000). The Roots of Racism and Abortion: An Exploration of Eugenics. Xlibris Corporation. p. 268. ISBN 0-7388-3089-5. See esp. "Chapter Seven: Laws Against Mixing Races"
Croly, David Goodman (1864). Miscegenation, The Theory of the Blending of the Races, Applied to the American White Man and Negro. New York: H. Dexter, Hamilton & Co. ISBN 0-7388-3089-5.
Deschamps, Bndicte, Le racisme anti-italien aux tats-Unis (1880C1940), in Exclure au nom de la race (tats-Unis, Irlande, Grande-Bretagne), Michel Prum (d.). Paris: Syllepse, 2000. 59C81.
Hodes, Martha, ed. "Miscegenation" (1998). Reader's Companion to U.S. Women's History. New York, Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. ISBN 0-395-67173-6.
Jacobson, Matthew Frye, Whiteness of a different color. European Immigrants and the Alchemy of Race, Harvard University Press, 1998.
Kaplan, S. (1949). "The Miscegenation Issue in the Election of 1864". The Journal of Negro History 34 (3): 274C343. doi:10.2307/2715904.
Lemire, Elise (July 2002). "Miscegenation": Making Race in America. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 0-8122-3664-5.
Novkov, Julie, Racial union: law, intimacy, and the White state in Alabama, 1865C1954, University of Michigan Press, 2008, pp. 125C128.
Novkov, J. (2002). "Racial Constructions: The Legal Regulation of Miscegenation in Alabama, 1890-1934". Law and History Review 20 (2): 225C277. doi:10.2307/744035.
Pascoe, Peggy (19 April 2004). "Why the Ugly Rhetoric Against Gay Marriage Is Familiar to this Historian of Miscegenation". George Mason University's History News Network. Retrieved 14 July 2008.
Rosenthal, Debra J. (2004). Race Mixture in Nineteenth-Century U.S and Spanish-American Fiction. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0-8078-5564-2.
Werner Sollors, ed. (19 October 2000). Interracialism: Black-White Intermarriage in American History, Literature, and Law (Sollors, Werner ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-512856-7.
Tehranian, John, Whitewashed: America's invisible Middle Eastern minority, New York University Press, 2009. ISBN 978-0-8147-8306-1
Ubeysekara, Ruwan Nisantha, Questioning the Revival: White Ethnicities in the Racial Pentagon, PhD Thesis, University of Bath, 2008.
External links[edit]
	Look up miscegenation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Miscegenation.
Explore Famous Interracial Couples and Other Race Relations Issues on the About.com Website.
Perez v. Sharp
Historical Background on Miscegenation
Wikisource-logo.svg Ernest Ingersoll (1920). "Cross-Fertilization in Animals and in Man". Encyclopedia Americana.
[show] v t e
Sexual ethics
[show] v t e
Multiracial topics
Categories: MarriageMultiracial affairsNazi GermanyRacism
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
Languages
Espa?ol
Esperanto
Fran?ais
???
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
Portugus

Simple English
Svenska
?????
?
Edit links
This page was last modified on 25 July 2016, at 01:17.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Shanghai Jiao Tong University seal
Former names
Nanyang Public School
Nan Yang College of Chiao Tung
National Chiao Tung University
Jiao Tong University
Motto	, [1]
Motto in English
When you drink water, never shall you forget its source; love your motherland and add credit to your Alma Mater[2]
Type	Public
Established	1896
President	Zhang Jie
Academic staff
2,979
Undergraduates	16,802[3]
Postgraduates	19,436 Master Candidates
5,059 Ph.D. Candidates[4]
Location	Shanghai, China
311203N 1212547ECoordinates: 311203N 1212547E
Campus	Urban
Affiliations	C9, Universitas 21
Website	 en
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Simplified Chinese	
Traditional Chinese	W
[show]Transcriptions
Shanghai Jiao Tong University is a public research university located in Shanghai, China. Established in 1896 by an imperial edict issued by the Guangxu Emperor, the university is renowned as one of the oldest and most prestigious and selective universities in China.

The university also annually produces the Academic Ranking of World Universities.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Name
2	History
3	Academics, enrollment, and staff
3.1	Reputation and rankings
3.2	Academic Ranking of World Universities
4	Organization
4.1	Academic schools
4.2	Directly affiliated departments
4.3	Graduate school
4.4	Affiliated institutes
4.5	Affiliated hospitals
4.6	Student organizations
4.6.1	SJTU Dancing Team
5	Campuses
5.1	Xuhui Campus
5.2	Minhang Campus
5.3	South Chongqing Road Campus
5.4	Qibao Campus
5.5	Shangzhong Road Campus
5.6	Fahuazhen Road Campus
6	Notable alumni
6.1	Government and politics
6.2	Natural sciences and mathematics
6.3	Information science, system science and electrical engineering
6.4	Engineering and technological sciences
6.5	Life sciences and medicine
6.6	Humanities and social sciences
6.7	Business
6.8	Sports
6.9	Alumni associations
7	See also
8	References
9	External links
Name[edit]
The word jiaotong () means "transportation". The university was administered by the state telegraph and communications agency during its early period. Today, the university does not translate "jiao tong" in its English name, as it is a comprehensive university that provides instruction and research in many fields, including those unrelated to communications.

History[edit]
In 1896, the Nanyang Public School (W) was founded in Shanghai by an imperial edict issued by the Guangxu Emperor, under the Business and Telegraphs Office of the imperial government. Four schools were established: a normal school, a school of foreign studies, a middle school, and a high school. Sheng Xuanhuai, the mandarin responsible for proposing the idea to the Guangxu Emperor, became the first president and is regarded as the founder of the university, with the assistance of John Calvin Ferguson, a missionary educator.


Nanyang Public School
In 1904, the Ministry of Commerce took over the school, and in 1905 changed its name to Imperial Polytechnic College of the Commerce Ministry.

In 1906, the college was placed under the Ministry of Posts and Telegraphs, and its name was changed to Shanghai Industrial College of the Ministry of Posts and Telegraphs.

When the Republic of China was founded, the college was placed under the Ministry of Communications and its name was once again changed, this time to Government Institute of Technology of the Communications Ministry.

In 1918, the republic government founded the School of Management. In 1920, the Government Institute of Technology of the Communications Ministry merged with two other colleges and changed its name to Nan Yang College of Chiao Tung.

In the 1930s, it was achieved renown for nurturing top engineers and scientists and was referred to as the "Eastern MIT".[5]

In 1938, the Ministry of Education took over the university and renamed it to National Chiao Tung University (Chinese: W) (the separate institution of National Chiao Tung University in Taiwan, is still known by this name). In 1943, the graduate school was founded.

When the Japanese surrendered in 1945, neither the Communist Party of China (CPC) nor the Kuomintang KMT trusted each other or were actively cooperating. After American-sponsored attempts to negotiate a coalition government failed in 1946, the Chinese Civil War resumed. The CPC defeated the Nationalists in 1949, forcing Chiang's government to retreat to Taiwan. During the evacuation, a part of faculty and alumni was taken to Taiwan by Chiang Kai-shek, founding National Chiao Tung University in Taiwan in 1958.

After the Chinese Civil War, the People's Republic of China was founded in 1949. Chiao Tung lost its "National" appellation and became Chiao Tung University to reflect the fact that all universities under the new socialist state would be public.

In the 1950s, the pinyin romanization system was developed in Mainland China and Chiao Tung University changed its English name to Jiao Tong University.

From 1952, the Communist government adopted a policy of creating Soviet-style specialized schools, reshuffling nearly all universities and colleges to follow the Soviet-style higher education model. Under this policy, some faculties of the university were shifted to other universities, and some engineering faculties from outside were absorbed into Jiao Tong University to form a specialized engineering university.

Shanghai Second Medical University was merged into Shanghai Jiao Tong University on July 18, 2005, under the name Medical School of Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

Since the reform and opening up policy in China, SJTU has grown substantially. It is composed of five campuses, including Xuhui, Minhang, Luwan, Qibao, and Fahua (), taking up an area of about 3,225,833 square meters. [6]

In 2013, Fran?ois Hollande inaugurated the SJTU-ParisTech Elite Institute of Technology (SPEIT), an institution based on the French engineering education system. The four founding member universities are cole Polytechnique, ENSTA ParisTech, Mines ParisTech and Tlcom ParisTech[7]

Academics, enrollment, and staff[edit]

School of Mechanical Engineering, Minhang Campus
Today SJTU has 31 schools (departments), 63 undergraduate programs, 250 masters-degree programs, 203 Ph.D. programs, 28 post-doctorate programs, and 11 state key laboratories and national engineering research centers.

Its total enrollment of students amounts to 42,881, of which 1,598 are international students. There are 17,766 undergraduates, and 24,017 masters and Ph.D. candidates.[6]

The university has more than 1,900 professors and associate professors, including 15 academicians of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, 20 academicians of the Chinese Academy of Engineering, 92 accredited professors and chair professors of the "Cheung Kong Scholars Program".

Reputation and rankings[edit]
University rankings
Global
ARWU[8]	101-150
Times[9]	301-350
QS[10]	70
Asia
ARWU[11]	6-15
Times[12]	40
QS (Global version)[13]
QS (Asia version)[14]	19
28
Internationally, SJTU is ranked among 101-150th globally by ARWU (2014). The institution came sixth in the QS BRICS University Rankings[15] and was 27th in the counterpart conducted by Times Higher Education.[16]

Academic Ranking of World Universities[edit]
Since 2003, Shanghai Jiao Tong University has produced the Academic Ranking of World Universities[17] which analyzes the top universities in the world on quality of faculty (40%), research output (40%), quality of education (10%) and performance vs. size (10%).[18] Its ranking is exclusively of research universities, mainly in the empirical sciences.

Organization[edit]
Academic schools[edit]
Biomedical Engineering
Naval Architecture, Ocean and Civil Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
University of Michigan - Shanghai Jiao Tong University Joint Institute
Electronic, Information and Electrical Engineering
Materials Science and Engineering
Sciences: Mathematics and Physics
Life Science and biotechnology
Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine
Humanities
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering
Economics and Management
Finance and MBA
International and Public Affairs
Foreign Languages
Agriculture and Biology
Environmental Science and Engineering
Pharmaceutics
Medical
Law
Media and Design
Micro-electronics
Information Security Engineering
Software Engineering
Directly affiliated departments[edit]
Department of Plastic Technology
Department of Sports
Graduate school[edit]
Graduate School website
Global Executive MBA Program (In collaboration with the University of Southern California)
Affiliated institutes[edit]
Institute of Aerospace Science and Technology
Research Institute of Micro/Nano Science and Technology
Institute of Energy
Affiliated hospitals[edit]
CWI International Peace Maternity and Child Health Hospital
Ruijin Hospital (website)
Renji Hospital (website)
Xinhua Hospital (website)
Shanghai First People's Hospital
Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital (website)
Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital
Shanghai Third People's Hospital (Baosteel Hospital)
Shanghai Children's Medical Center (website)
Shanghai Chest Hospital (website)
Shanghai Mental Health Center (website)
Shanghai Children's Hospital (website)
Student organizations[edit]
SJTU Dancing Team[edit]
Diversified genres including Latin, Ballet, Chinese Folk Dance, Chinese Classical Dance and Yang Go.

Awards: Second-class prize on National University Art Competition
Campuses[edit]
Xuhui Campus[edit]

A scene of the original library, Xuhui campus
The previous main campus was located in Xujiahui, in the Xuhui District of Shanghai, formerly a largely Catholic area and a site of several educational institutions.

Most buildings on campus were influenced by American architecture, while the main gate, which was built in 1935, is of traditional Chinese style reflecting the University's earlier status as the "Imperial Polytechnic College". The approaches to the main gate were via a series of marble bridges, similar to, although smaller than, those built in front of Tiananmen. However, recent road expansions have demolished the river as well as most of bridges. A copy of this famous gate scene have been built on the east of Minhang campus.

The construction of the campus never came to an end in the past century. Existing buildings: the Middle College building (built in 1898), the original library (built in 1919), the gymnasium (built in 1925), the administrative building (built in 1933), the Xinjian building (built in 1953), the new Upper College building (built in 1955), the second teaching building (built in 1960), Bao Zhaolong library (built in 1985) and Haoran high-tech building (built in 1996) were constructed one after another.

The university's School of International Education is located here, where a large number of international students take classes throughout the academic year (however, most international students that take degree courses are in Minhang campus). The campus still houses a variety of scientific research institutions, State Key Laboratory of Ocean Engineering for instance, although most moved to the new campus since 1987.

Minhang Campus[edit]

The Siyuan Lake, Minhang Campus
The Minhang campus is located in the Minhang District on the outskirts of metropolitan Shanghai. This young campus, which was founded in 1987, covers 2,822,903m2 once farmland. Zizhu Science Park, where Intel, ST Microelectronics, Microsoft, Sandisk and other high-tech companies placed their research and development centers, to the south of this campus.

Currently, most administrative and academic framework of the university and the majority of undergraduate and graduate students are situated at this campus, which is now accompanied by the newly built Minhang Campus of East China Normal University.

South Chongqing Road Campus[edit]
It used to be the campus of Shanghai Second Medical University, which is located in the Luwan District of Shanghai. The Aurora University (Shanghai), a pre-eminent Catholic university in Shanghai, was located there before 1952.

Qibao Campus[edit]
In 1999, Shanghai Agricultural College was merged into SJTU. Its campus, located at 2678 Qixin Road (postcode 201101), became the Qibao Campus of SJTU.

Shangzhong Road Campus[edit]
In 2006, Shanghai Jiao Tong University sold this campus to Shanghai High School.

Fahuazhen Road Campus[edit]
This campus is where Jiao Tong's Antai College of Economics and Management is located.

Notable alumni[edit]
After more than a century of operation, Jiao Tong University has inherited the old tradition of "high starting points, solid foundation, strict requirements and extensive practice." Today, associations organized by Jiao Tong's alumni can be found in the United States, Japan, European Union countries, Canada, Southeast Asia, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Mainland China. They call themselves Jiao Tong (Jiaoda) people.

Jiaoda alumni, no matter where they are, are playing a significant role and active part in business, academic and politic circle. Deep in their mind, an inspiring word has already been impressed: "Yesterday I went into Jiaoda with honor; Today I will be an honor to Jiaoda".

The routine services of these alumni associations include: updating contact lists, holding conferences, conducting Sino-foreign cultural exchanges, and keeping contact with other alumni associations throughout the world.

Students from SJTU have won top prizes in various competitions, including ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest, International Mathematical Contest in Modeling and Electronics Design Contests. Famous alumni include Jiang Zemin, Lu Dingyi, Ding Guangen, Wang Daohan, Qian Xuesen, Wu Wenjun, Zou Taofen, Mao Yisheng, Cai Er, Huang Yanpei, Shao Lizi, Wang An and many more. More than 200 of the academicians of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and Chinese Academy of Engineering are alumni of Jiao Tong University.

Notable alumni are listed below.

Government and politics[edit]
Latin	Chinese	Graduated in	Profile
Cai E		1898	famous general, founder of the Republican Protection Army against Yuan Shikai
Huang Yanpei		1902	politician, industrialist, educator, and one of the founding pioneers of the China Democratic League
Shao Lizi		1905	politician, educator, former President of Shanghai University and teacher of Chinese literature in Fudan University
Chen Yibai		1922	Minister of Department of Communications in the government of Republic of China
Lu Dingyi		1926	politician, former Head of Propaganda Department
Wang Daohan		1933	former Mayor of Shanghai, paramount politician who held the famous Wang-Koo summits together with Koo Chen-fu
Jiang Zemin		1947	politician, former CPC General Secretary, President of the People's Republic of China and Chairman of the Central Military Commission
Ding Guangen		1951	politician, former Minister of Railways, Head of Propaganda Department
Shu Guo		1955	former Minister of Health, President of Red Cross Society of China, President of Chinese Medical Association
Ye Liansong		1960	politician, former Governor of Hebei Province
Chen Mingyi		1962	politician, Secretary of Party Committee of Fujian Province
Wan Xueyuan		1964	former Governor of Zhejiang Province, Vice Minister of Personnel of P.R. China
Yan Junqi		1967	politician, Chairperson of China Association of Promoting Democracy
Chen Zhu	 	1981	Minister of Health of P.R. China
Natural sciences and mathematics[edit]
English name	Chinese name	Graduated in/
Served on faculty during

Profile	Academicianship
Qian Xuesen/
Hsue-Shen Tsien		1934	missile and space program chief scientist, and mother of Christine
Two-Bombs-One-Satellite medalist,
National Exceptional Contribution Scientist awardee (only one in history so far)
Co-founder of Jet Propulsion Laboratory	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering
Wu Wenjun/
Wen-Tsn Wu		1940	mathematician, State Preeminent Science and Technology Award winner, Shaw Prize winner	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Fellow of the TWAS
Xu Guangxian/
G.X. Xu		1944	chemist, State Preeminent Science and Technology Award winner	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Hu Hesheng		1945C1948	mathematician	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Wu Youxun/
Y.H. Woo		1949	physicist; educator	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Member of the German Academy of Sciences Leopoldina
He Zuoxiu		1949	physicist	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Gu Min/
Min Gu		1982	scientist in micro-photonics	Fellow of Australian Academy of Science,
Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering
Zhang Jie		2006Cpresent	physicist in x-ray lasers, high field and laser-plasma physics	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Member of the German Academy of Sciences Leopoldina,
International Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering, Fellow of the TWAS
Yao Tongbin	zh:	1945	missile and space program scientist,
Two-Bombs-One-Satellite medalist
Information science, system science and electrical engineering[edit]
English name	Chinese name	Graduated in/
Served on faculty during

Profile	Academicianship
Zhu Wuhua		1923/1945-1998	scientist in electronics; educator	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Cai Jintao		1930	scientist in electronics	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Chu Yinghuang		1931	specialist in power engineering	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Qian Zhonghan		1933	scientist in power engineering	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Zhang Zhongjun/
T.T. Chang		1934/1940-1995	scientist in electrical systems and automatic control	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Wang An/
An Wang		1940	computer scientist and inventor, founder of Wang Laboratories	Member of the U.S. National Academy of Engineering
Zhou Wenjun/
Wen Tsing Chow		1940	missile guidance scientist and digital computer pioneer	
Cao Jianyou		1940	scientist in electrical power systems	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Yang Jiachi		1941	scientist in automatic control, satellite control specialist, Two-Bombs-One-Satellite medalist	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Tian Binggeng/
Ping King Tien		1941	scientist in microwave electronics, optical electronics and materials science	Member of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences,
Member of the U.S. National Academy of Engineering,
Foreign Member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering,
Academician of the Academia Sinica, Fellow of the TWAS
Li Tianhe/
Thomas H. Lee		1946	specialist in power engineering	Member of the U.S. National Academy of Engineering,
Foreign Member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering
Tong Zhipeng	i	1946	scientist in telecommunications	Member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering
Gu Yuxiu/
Y.H. Ku	L	1945-1947 (as faculty)	scientist in electrical machinery, system and control; educator; writer, playwright and poet	
Ge Shouren/
Ernest S. Kuh		1945-1947 (as student)	scientist in circuit theory and electronic design automation	Member of the U.S. National Academy of Engineering,
Foreign Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Academician of the Academia Sinica
Xia Peisu		1947	computer scientist	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Wang Geng		1949	specialist in electrical power transmission	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Chen Jingxiong		1950	scientist in electromagnetics, microwave and antennas	Member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering
Kuang Dingbo		1952	scientist in infrared and remote sensing	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Li lemin		1952	scientist in telecommunications	Member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering
Tang Renyuan		1952	scientist in electric motor engineering	Member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering
Zhu Yinghao		1952	scientist in electric power transformers	Member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering
Zhao Zisen		1953	specialist in telecommunications	Member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering
Chen Junliang		1955	scientist in telecommunications	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering
Jiang Xinsong		1956	scientist in robotics and automation	Member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering
Yao Xi		1957	scientist in materials and devices	Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Foreign Associate of U.S. National Academy of Engineering
Chen Yazhu		1962	scientist in power electronics and biomedical engineering	Member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering
Teng Shanghua/
Shang-Hua Teng		1985	computer scientist, G?del Prize winner	
Engineering and technological sciences[edit]
Chow Wen Tsing/Wen Tsing Chow () - missile guidance scientist and digital computer pioneer
Qian Xuesen () - missile and space program chief scientist, Two-Bombs-One-Satellite medalist, National Exceptional Contribution Scientist awardee
Xu Xueyan () - famous ship designer[19]
Yang Jiachi () - space program scientist, specialist of automatic control, Two-Bombs-One-Satellite medalist
Zhang Guangdou () - world-renowned specialist in hydraulic engineering
Life sciences and medicine[edit]
Chen Zhu () - hematologist, molecular biologist, and current minister of Ministry of Health
Luc Montagnier () - Nobel Prize laureate for the discovery of HIV
Wang Zhenyi/Zhen-yi Wang () - hematologist, State Preeminent Science and Technology Award winner
Humanities and social sciences[edit]
Cai Yuanpei () - famous educator, esperantist and the president of Peking University
Hong Yi () - master painter, musician, dramatist, calligrapher, seal cutter, poet, and Buddhist monk
Lisa Lu () - Chinese-American actress and documentary producer
Mao Yushi () - economist
Wu Youxun () - educator
Business[edit]
Jiang Jianqing () - president and chairman of the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China
Mao Daolin () - CEO of Sina
Wang Shizhen () - founder of China Merchants Bank
Yang Yuanqing () - chairman of the Lenovo Group Limited
Zhu Jun () - founder of The9 Limited, chairman of football club Shanghai Shenhua F.C.
Sports[edit]
Ding Junhui () - Professional snooker player
Wang Liqin () - Professional table tennis player, World and Olympic multi medalist, once of best players in history
Liu Guoliang () - Olympic gold medalist, chief manager of China's table tennis national team
Yao Ming () - Professional basketball player
Sui Lu (- Olympic Silver Medalist gymnast
Alumni associations[edit]
Online Community For Shanghai Jiao Tong University Alumni
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Alumni Association in Japan
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Alumni Association in Singapore
Shanghai Jiaotong University Alumni Association in Shenzhen
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Alumni Association of Silicon Valley
Chiao Tung University Alumni Association in Northern California
Jiao Tong/Chiao Tung University Alumni Association of Southern California
See also[edit]
	Shanghai portal
	University portal
National Jiaotong University
References[edit]
Jump up ^ "". Retrieved 2014-07-10.
Jump up ^ "The Naming Ceremony of Cheng Jianmin Building Grandly Held". Retrieved 2014-07-10.
Jump up ^ "2011C12-31 Overview (Undergraduate)". Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Retrieved 2012-03-16.
Jump up ^ "2011C12-31 Overview (Postgraduate)". Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Retrieved 2012-03-16.
Jump up ^ "During the last century: Eastern MIT". Xi'an Jiao Tong University. Archived from the original on 2007-10-16. Retrieved 2007-06-19.
^ Jump up to: a b http://en.sjtu.edu.cn/about-sjtu/overview. Missing or empty |title= (help)
Jump up ^ Overview, SJTU-ParisTech Elite Institute of Technology
Jump up ^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities: Global". Institute of Higher Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. 2015. Retrieved August 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "World University Rankings 2015-2016". Times Higher Education. 2015. Retrieved October 1, 2015.
Jump up ^ "QS World University Rankings? 2015/16". Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 2015. Retrieved September 18, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities: Global". Institute of Higher Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Asia University Rankings 2016". Times Higher Education. 2016. Retrieved 11 July 2016.
Jump up ^ "QS World University Rankings? 2015/16 (extracting Asian universities)". Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 2015. Retrieved September 15, 2015.
Jump up ^ "QS University Rankings: Asia 2016". Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2016.
Jump up ^ "QS University Rankings: BRICS". Quacquarelli Symonds. 2013-12-17. Retrieved 2013-12-17.
Jump up ^ "BRICS & Emerging Economies Rankings 2014". Times Higher Education. Retrieved October 2, 2014.
Jump up ^ Academic Ranking of World Universities - 2007
Jump up ^ ADRW2007-Methodology
Jump up ^ "Xu Xueyan".
External links[edit]
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University (English website)
SJTU Academic Ranking of World Universities
SJTU 2006 ARWU rankings
SJTU 2007 ARWU rankings
SJTU 2008 ARWU rankings
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3d map
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Pictures
[show] v t e
Universitas 21
[show] v t e
16 national key universities of the People's Republic of China (first batch in 1959)
[show] v t e
C9 League
[show] v t e
Project 985
[show] v t e
Project 211
[show] v t e
Universities and colleges in Shanghai
[show] v t e
Shanghai
[show] v t e
Yangtze Delta Universities Alliance
[show] v t e
Associations of independent college admissions of Chinese universities
[show] v t e
Port-City University League
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 139556933 LCCN: n80138712 SUDOC: 150102984 NLA: 36602340
Categories: Universities and colleges in ShanghaiProject 211Project 985Educational institutions established in 1896Jiaotong UniversityShanghai Jiao Tong University1896 establishments in ChinaC9 LeagueVice-ministerial universities in ChinaXuhui District
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Languages
???????
Az?rbaycanca
Ban-lam-g
Catal
Deutsch
Espa?ol
?????
Fran?ais
???
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
?????
Mng-d??ng-ng??
Nederlands
Z
Norsk bokm?l
??????
Polski

Suomi
Svenska
???
Trk?e
Ti?ng Vi?t

Z

Edit links
This page was last modified on 28 July 2016, at 15:26.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
Guangxu Emperor
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Kwang-su" redirects here. For the Korean given name, see Kwang-su (name).

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This is a Manchu name; the family name is Aisin-Gioro.
Guangxu Emperor
w
Emperor Guangxu.jpg
Qing dynasty 11th Qing Emperor of China
Reign	25 February 1875 C 14 November 1908
Predecessor	Tongzhi Emperor
Successor	Xuantong Emperor
Regents	Empress Dowager Ci'an
(1875C1881)
Empress Dowager Cixi
(1875C1908)
Born	14 August 1871
Prince Chun Mansion, Beijing, China
Died	14 November 1908 (aged 37)
Zhongnanhai, Beijing, China
Burial	Chongling Mausoleum, Western Qing Tombs, China
Spouse	Empress Xiaodingjing
Consort Jin
Consort Zhen
Full name
Chinese: Aixin Jueluo Zaitian (X_d)
Manchu: Aisin-Gioro hala i Dzai Tiyan
Mongolian: Altan-Gioro Sai Tiyan
Era name and dates
Chinese: Guangxu (w)
Manchu: Badarangga Doro
Mongolian: Badaragultu T?r: 6 February 1875 C 21 January 1909
Posthumous name
Emperor Tongtian Chongyun Dazhong Zhizheng Jingwen Weiwu Renxiao Ruizhi Duanjian Kuanqin Jing
(\)
Temple name
Qing Dezong
()
House	Aisin Gioro
Father	Yixuan, Prince Chun
Mother	Yehenara Wanzhen
Guangxu Emperor
Traditional Chinese	w
Simplified Chinese	
[show]Transcriptions
The Guangxu Emperor (14 August 1871 C 14 November 1908), personal name Zaitian (Manchu: Dzai-Tiyan), was the eleventh emperor of the Qing dynasty, and the ninth Qing emperor to rule over China. His reign lasted from 1875 to 1908, but in practice he ruled, under Empress Dowager Cixi's influence, only from 1889 to 1898. He initiated the Hundred Days' Reform, but was abruptly stopped when the empress dowager launched a coup in 1898, after which he was put under house arrest until his death. His regnal name, "Guangxu", means "glorious succession".

Contents  [hide] 
1	Accession to the throne and upbringing
2	Taking over the reins of power
3	Years in power
4	Under house arrest after 1898
5	Death
6	Historical views
7	Personal life
8	Honours [18]
9	Ancestry
10	In popular culture
11	References
Accession to the throne and upbringing[edit]
Zaitian was the second son of Prince Chun, and his primary spouse Yehenara Wanzhen, a younger sister of Empress Dowager Cixi. On 12 January 1875, Zaitian's cousin, the Tongzhi Emperor, died without a son. Empress Dowager Ci'an suggested enthroning one of Prince Gong's sons as the next emperor, but she was overruled by Cixi. Instead, breaking the imperial convention that a new emperor must always be of a generation after that of the previous emperor, Cixi nominated her nephew and the imperial family agreed with her choice.

Zaitian was named heir and successor to his uncle, the Xianfeng Emperor, rather than his cousin and predecessor, the Tongzhi Emperor, so as to maintain the father-son succession law. He ascended to the throne at the age of four and used "Guangxu" as his regnal name, therefore he is known as the "Guangxu Emperor". He was adopted by Empress Dowager Cixi as a son. For her part, she remained as regent under the title "Holy Mother Empress Dowager".

Beginning in 1876, the Guangxu Emperor was taught by Weng Tonghe, who had also been involved in the disastrous upbringing of the Tongzhi Emperor, yet, somehow managed to be exonerated of all charges.[1] Weng would instill in the emperor a notion of having to emphasize his filial piety towards the empress dowagers.[2]

In 1881, when the Guangxu Emperor was nine, Empress Dowager Ci'an died unexpectedly, leaving Empress Dowager Cixi as sole regent for the boy. However, Cixi had been suffering from long-standing ill health. During this time, the imperial eunuchs often abused their influence over the boy-emperor.[3] The Guangxu Emperor reportedly also had begun to hold some audiences on his own as an act of necessity.[4]

Taking over the reins of power[edit]
In 1887, the Guangxu Emperor would have been old enough to begin to reign in his own right. However, the previous year, several courtiers, including Prince Chun and Weng Tonghe, had petitioned the empress dowager to postpone her retirement from the regency. Despite Cixi's agreement to remain as regent, by 1886 the Guangxu Emperor had begun to write comments on the palace memorials.[4] In the spring of 1887, he partook in his first field plowing ceremony, and by the end of the year, had begun to rule under the supervision of Cixi.

Eventually, in February 1889, in preparation for Empress Dowager Cixi's retirement, the Guangxu Emperor was married. As his empress, and much to his disliking, Cixi had selected her own niece, the Guangxu Emperor's cousin, Jingfen, to become empress, who would be known as Empress Longyu. She also selected, as his two concubines, sisters, who became Consorts Jin and Zhen. The following week, with the Guangxu Emperor married, Cixi retired from the regency.

Years in power[edit]
Even after the Guangxu Emperor began formal rule, Empress Dowager Cixi continued to influence his decisions and actions, despite residing several months of the year at the Summer Palace. Weng Tonghe reportedly observed that while the emperor attended to day to day state affairs, in more difficult cases, the emperor and the Grand Council sought the advice of the empress dowager.[5] In fact, the emperor would quite often journey out to the Summer Palace to pay his respects to his aunt and to discuss state affairs with her.

In March 1891, the Guangxu Emperor received the foreign ministers to China at an audience in the "Pavilion of Purple Light," in what is now part of Zhongnanhai, repeating something that had also been done by his cousin, the Tongzhi Emperor, in 1873. That summer, under pressure from the foreign legations and in response to revolts in the Yangtze River valley that were targeting Christian missionaries, the emperor issued an edict giving Christians imperial protection.[6]

The Guangxu Emperor, growing up, apparently had been instilled with the notion of the importance of frugality. In this vein, in 1892, he tried to implement a series of draconian measures in order to reduce expenditures by the Imperial Household Department, which proved to be one of his few administrative successes.[7] But, it was only a partial victory, as he nevertheless had to approve higher expenditures than he would have liked, in order to meet the needs of Empress Dowager Cixi.

1894 saw the outbreak of the First Sino-Japanese War. During the war, even though he was the sovereign ruler of the Qing Empire, the Guangxu Emperor was often by-passed by the officials who instead sent their court memorials to Empress Dowager Cixi for her reading and approval.[8] Eventually, two sets of Grand Council memoranda were created, one for the emperor and the other for the empress dowager C a practice which would continue until it was rendered unnecessary by the events in the fall of 1898. Following the Qing Empire's humiliating defeat and being forced to agree to the terms of the Treaty of Shimonoseki, the Guangxu Emperor reportedly expressed his wish to abdicate.[9] The emperor and the Qing government faced further humiliation in late 1897 when the German Empire used the murders of two priests in Shandong Province as a pretext to occupy Jiaozhou Bay, prompting a "scramble for concessions" by the other foreign powers.

Following the war and the scramble for concessions, the Guangxu Emperor came to believe that by learning from constitutional monarchies like Japan, the Qing Empire would become more politically and economically powerful. In June 1898, the emperor began the Hundred Days' Reform, aimed at a series of sweeping political, legal, and social changes. For a brief time, after the supposed retirement of Empress Dowager Cixi, the Guangxu Emperor issued edicts for a massive number of far-reaching modernising reforms with the help of more progressive ministers such as Kang Youwei and Liang Qichao.

Changes ranged from infrastructure to industry and the civil examination system. The Guangxu Emperor issued decrees allowing the establishment of a modern university in Beijing, the construction of the Lu-Han railway, and a system of budgets similar to that of the west. The initial goal was to make China a modern, constitutional empire, but still within the traditional framework, as with Japan's Meiji Restoration.

The reforms, however, were not only too sudden for a China still under significant neo-Confucian influence and other elements of traditional culture, but also came into conflict with Empress Dowager Cixi, who held real power. Many officials, deemed useless and dismissed by the Guangxu Emperor, were begging the empress dowager for help. Although Cixi did nothing to stop the Hundred Days' Reform from taking place, she knew the only way to secure her power base was to stage a military coup. The Guangxu Emperor was made aware of such a plan, and asked Kang Youwei and his reformist allies to plan his rescue. They decided to use the help of Yuan Shikai, who had a modernised army, albeit only 6,000-strong. Cixi relied on Ronglu's army in Tianjin.

Ronglu also had an ally, general Dong Fuxiang, who commanded 10,000 Muslim Kansu Braves of the imperial army, including generals such as Ma Fuxiang and Ma Fulu. They were stationed in the Beijing metropolitan area and constantly attacked foreigners and westerners, they were on the side of the conservatives under Cixi during the coup. They were also armed with western rifles and modern artillery, which showed that the conservative faction of Empress Dowager Cixi were willing to use western technology.[10][11]

However, the day before the staged coup was supposed to take place, Yuan Shikai revealed all the plans to Ronglu, exposing the Guangxu Emperor's plans. This gained Yuan Shikai the trust of Empress Dowager Cixi, as well as the status of the lifetime enemy of the Guangxu Emperor, and later, the emperor's younger half-brother, Zaifeng. Following the exposure of the plot, the emperor and empress dowager met, and the emperor retreated to Yingtai Pavilion, a palace on a lake that is now part of the Zhongnanhai Compound.

Lei Chia-sheng (}), a Taiwanese professor, proposes an alternative view that the Guangxu Emperor might have been led into a trap by the reformists led by Kang Youwei, who in his turn was in Lei's opinion tricked by British missionary Timothy Richard and former Japanese prime minister It Hirobumi into agreeing to appoint It as one of many foreign advisors.[12] British ambassador Claude MacDonald said that the reformists had actually "much injured" the modernisation of China.[13] According to Lei, Empress Dowager Cixi learned of the plot, and decided to put an end to it and save China from coming under foreign control.[14]

Under house arrest after 1898[edit]

Portrait of the Guangxu Emperor in his study
The Guangxu Emperor's duties after 1898 became rather limited, compared to his position prior. While some[who?] have argued that the emperor was effectively removed from power as emperor (despite keeping the title) and was placed under house arrest, he actually did retain some status.

The emperor was kept informed of the state affairs, reading them with Empress Dowager Cixi prior to audiences,[15] and was also present at audiences, sitting on a stool to Cixis left hand, while Cixi occupied the main throne. He discharged his ceremonial rules, such as offering up the imperial sacrifices. However, he would never reign alone again.

In 1898, shortly after the collapse of the Hundred Days Reform, the Guangxu Emperor's health began to decline, prompting Empress Dowager Cixi to name Pujun, a son of the emperor's cousin, the reactionary Prince Duan, as heir presumptive (however, both Pujun and his father were removed from their positions following the Boxer Rebellion). He eventually was examined by the doctor at the French Legation, and was diagnosed with chronic nephritis, and it was also found that he was impotent.

On 14 August 1900, the Guangxu Emperor, along with Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Longyu and some other court officials, fled from Beijing as the forces of the Eight-Nation Alliance marched on the capital to relieve the legations which had been besieged during the Boxer Rebellion.

Returning to the capital in January 1902, after the withdrawal of the allied powers, the Guangxu Emperor was known to have spent the next few years working in his isolated palace with watches and clocks, which had been a childhood fascination, some say in an effort to pass the time until the death of Empress Dowager Cixi. He also read widely and spent time learning English from Cixi's western-educated lady-in-waiting, Princess Der Ling.

Death[edit]

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The Guangxu Emperor died on 14 November 1908, a day before Empress Dowager Cixi. He died relatively young, at the age of 37. For a long time there were several theories about the emperor's death, none of which was completely accepted by historians. Most were inclined to maintain that the Guangxu Emperor was poisoned by Empress Dowager Cixi (herself very ill) because she was afraid of the emperor reversing her policies after her death, and wanted to prevent this from happening. The fact that the two died a day apart is significant. Another possibility is that the Guangxu Emperor was poisoned by Yuan Shikai, who knew that if the emperor were to ever come to power again, Yuan would likely be executed for treason.[16] There are no reliable sources to prove who murdered the Guangxu Emperor. In 1911, Cixi's former eunuch Li Lianying was murdered, possibly by Yuan, implying that they had conspired in the emperor's murder. This theory was offered by Puyi in his biography, who claimed he heard it from an old eunuch.

The medical records kept by the Guangxu Emperor's physician indicate the emperor suffered from "spells of violent stomachache", and that his face would turn blue, typical symptoms of arsenic poisoning.[16] To dispel persistent rumours that the emperor had been poisoned, the Qing imperial court produced documents and doctors' records suggesting that the Guangxu Emperor died from natural causes, but these did not successfully divert suspicion.

On 4 November 2008, forensic tests revealed that the level of arsenic in the Guangxu Emperor's remains was 2,000 times higher than that of ordinary people. Scientists concluded that the poison could only be administered in a high dose one time. China Daily quoted a historian, Dai Yi, who speculated that Empress Dowager Cixi may have known of her imminent death and may have worried that the Guangxu Emperor would continue his reforms after her death.[17]

The Guangxu Emperor was succeeded by Empress Dowager Cixi's choice as heir, his nephew Puyi, who took the regnal name "Xuantong". The Guangxu Emperor's consort, who became Empress Dowager Longyu, signed the abdication decree as regent in 1912, ending two thousand years of imperial rule in China. Empress Dowager Longyu died childless in 1913.

After the Xinhai Revolution of 1911, the Republic of China funded the construction of the Guangxu Emperor's mausoleum in the Western Qing Tombs. The tomb was robbed during the Chinese Civil War and the underground palace (burial chamber) is now open to the public.

Historical views[edit]
In 1912 Sun Yat-sen praised the Guangxu Emperor for his educational reform package that allowed China to learn more about Western culture. After the establishment of the People's Republic of China in 1949, historian Fan Wenlan () called the Guangxu Emperor "a Manchu noble who could accept Western ideas". Some historians[who?] think that the Guangxu Emperor was the first Chinese leader to implement policies of modernisation and capitalism. The Guangxu Emperor also epitomised the lowest imperial power had come since the beginning of the Qing dynasty, and was the only Qing emperor to have been put under house arrest during his own reign.

Personal life[edit]

The wedding of the Guangxu Emperor and Empress Longyu
The Guangxu Emperor had one empress and two consorts in total. His principal spouse was Empress Xiaodingjing, while his two consorts were Consort Jin and Consort Zhen.

The emperor was forced by Empress Dowager Cixi to marry her niece (his cousin) Jingfen, who was two years his senior. Jingfen's father, Guixiang (Cixi's younger brother), and Cixi selected her to be the Guangxu Emperor's Empress Consort in order to strengthen the power of her own family. After the marriage, Jingfen was made empress and was granted the honorific title of "Longyu", meaning "auspicious and prosperous" (Chinese: ) after the death of her husband. However, the Guangxu Emperor detested Empress Longyu, and spent most of his time with his favourite concubine, Consort Zhen (Chinese: ), (better known in English as the "Pearl Consort"). Rumours say that in 1900, Consort Zhen was drowned by being thrown into a well on Cixi's order after Consort Zhen begged Empress Dowager Cixi to let the Guangxu Emperor stay in Beijing for negotiations with the foreign powers. That incident happened before Empress Dowager Cixi was preparing to leave the Forbidden City due to the occupation of Beijing by the Eight-Nation Alliance in 1900. Like his predecessor, the Tongzhi Emperor, the Guangxu Emperor died without issue. After the Guangxu Emperor's death in 1908, Empress Dowager Longyu reigned in cooperation with Zaifeng (Prince Chun).

Honours [18][edit]
Knight of the Order of the Black Eagle (Kingdom of Prussia, 28 June 1898).
Knight Grand Cross [in brilliants] of the Order of the Red Eagle (Kingdom of Prussia, 28 June 1898).
Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Order of Kamehameha I (Kingdom of Hawaii, 1882).
Knight Grand Collar of the Supreme Order of the Chrysanthemum (Empire of Japan).
Ancestry[edit]
See also: Prince Chun ()  Family tree
[show]Ancestors of the Guangxu Emperor
In popular culture[edit]
In the short alternative history story "Foreign Devils" by Walter Jon Williams, China is invaded by the same fearsome Martians depicted in H.G. Wells' War of the Worlds. China suffers terrible death and destruction and the Emperor is forced to flee, but by the time the Martians have died off from earthly diseases, they have destroyed most of the Guangxu Emperor's human enemies. The Emperor then proceeds to eliminate his remaining foes, assume unquestioned power in China and enact his reforms, fully and unhinderd. He uses the disarray of European powers, which were also invaded by the Martians, to shake off colonial tutelage and make China a world power 50 years earlier than it did in our history. In this changed history, China remains a monarchy and there is no Chinese Republic. (The story appears in the collection "War of the Worlds: Global Dispatches".)

References[edit]
Jump up ^ Kwong, Luke S.K. A Mosaic of the Hundred Days: Personalities, Politics and Ideas of 1898 (Harvard University Press, 1984), pg. 45
Jump up ^ Kwong, pgs. 52 & 53
Jump up ^ Kwong, pgs. 47 & 48
^ Jump up to: a b Kwong, pg. 54
Jump up ^ Kwong, pgs. 26 & 27
Jump up ^ Seagrave, Sterling Dragon Lady: the Life and Legend of the Last Empress of China (Knopf, 1992), pg. 291
Jump up ^ Kwong, pg. 56
Jump up ^ Kwong, pg. 27
Jump up ^ Seagrave, pg. 186
Jump up ^ Ann Heylen (2004). Chronique du Toumet-Ortos: looking through the lens of Joseph Van Oost, missionary in Inner Mongolia (1915C1921). Leuven, Belgium: Leuven University Press. p. 203. ISBN 90-5867-418-5. Retrieved 2010-06-28.
Jump up ^ Patrick Taveirne (2004). Han-Mongol encounters and missionary endeavors: a history of Scheut in Ordos (Hetao) 1874C1911. Leuven, Belgium: Leuven University Press. p. 514. ISBN 90-5867-365-0. Retrieved 2010-06-28.
Jump up ^ Richard, Timothy, Forty-five Years in China: Reminiscences publ. Frederick A. Stokes (1916)
Jump up ^ Correspondence Respecting the Affairs of China, Presented to Both Houses of Parliament by Command of Her Majesty (London, 1899.3), No. 401, p. 303.
Jump up ^ Lei Chia-sheng}, Liwan kuanglan: Wuxu zhengbian xintan  [Containing the furious waves: a new view of the 1898 coup], Taipei: Wanjuan lou f, 2004.
Jump up ^ Derling, Princess Two Years in the Forbidden City, (New York: Moffat Yard & Company, pgs. 69-70 (New York: Moffat Yard & Company, 1911), accessed June 25th, 2013 http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/toc/modeng/public/DerYear.html
^ Jump up to: a b Mu, Eric. Reformist Emperor Guangxu was Poisoned, Study Confirms". Danwei. 3 November 2008. Retrieved 2 November 2011.
Jump up ^ "Arsenic killed Chinese emperor, reports say". CNN. 4 November 2008.
Jump up ^ Royal Ark
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Guangxu Emperor.
Guangxu Emperor
House of Aisin Gioro
Born: 14 August 1871 Died: 14 November 1908
Regnal titles
Preceded by
The Tongzhi Emperor	Emperor of China
1875C1908	Succeeded by
The Xuantong Emperor
(Puyi)
[show] v t e
Emperors of the Qing dynasty
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 75204530 LCCN: n82125849 ISNI: 0000 0000 8267 2409 NLA: 36613512 NDL: 00622952
Categories: Qing dynasty emperors19th-century Chinese monarchs20th-century Chinese monarchs1871 births1908 deathsChild rulers from AsiaChinese dissidentsChinese people of the Boxer RebellionDeaths by poisoningEmperors from BeijingRecipients of the Order of the Black EagleRecipients of the Royal Order of Kamehameha IGrand Crosses of the Order of the Red Eagle1870s in China1880s in China1890s in China1900s in ChinaMurdered Chinese emperors
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Languages
Ban-lam-g
Catal
Deutsch
Espa?ol
Esperanto
Fran?ais
Z/Hak-ka-ng?
???
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
Basa Jawa
Lietuvi?
Magyar
?????
Mng-d??ng-ng??

Nederlands
Z
Norsk bokm?l
Norsk nynorsk
Occitan
Polski
Portugus
Roman?

Scots
 / srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
???
Trk?e
?
Ti?ng Vi?t

Z

Edit links
This page was last modified on 1 July 2016, at 09:57.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
Gundam
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the anime series. For the mecha themselves, see Mobile weapons.
"Earth Federation" redirects here. It is not to be confused with United Earth Federation or Terran Federation (disambiguation).

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Gundam
Gundam.jpg
The RX-78-2 Gundam, by Hajime Katoki
Creator	Yoshiyuki Tomino
Sunrise
Original work	Mobile Suit Gundam
Print publications
Novels	See list
Comics	See list
Films and television
Films	See below
Television series	See below
Games
Traditional	Gundam War Collectible Card Game
Video games	See list
Miscellaneous
Toys	Gundam Model
The Robot Spirits
S.H. Figuarts
Gundam (Japanese:  Hepburn: Gandamu?), also referred to as the Gundam Series (` Gandamu Shirzu?), is a science fiction media franchise created by Sunrise that feature giant robots (or "mecha") called "mobile suits", with titular mobile suits that carry the name "Gundam."

The franchise started on April 7, 1979, as an anime TV series called Mobile Suit Gundam, which was revolutionary in that it defined the real robot genre of anime by featuring giant robots in a militaristic war setting. The popularity of the first TV series and the merchandising that followed spawned a franchise that has come to include works released in numerous media. Titles have appeared in the form of multiple television series and OVAs, movies, manga, novels, and video games. The franchise has also led to the creation of one of the biggest toy and hobby franchises in the Japanese toy industry.

As of 2014, the Gundam franchise generated a total of 80 billion yen in revenues.[1] The 2014 retail sales of Gundam toy and hobby items totaled 18.4 billion yen.[1] In the 2008 ranking of average sales figures for anime copies sold in Japan (1970-2008 total sales figures averaged by episode), Gundam series were in four of the top five places: Mobile Suit Gundam ranked second, with Mobile Suit Gundam SEED Destiny third, Mobile Suit Gundam SEED fourth, and Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam fifth. Also, Mobile Suit Gundam Wing ranked 18th and Mobile Suit Gundam ZZ ranked 20th.[2] Gunpla (Gundam Plastic model) holds 90% of the Japan character plastic model market.[3]

Academics in Japan have also viewed the series as inspiration, with the International Gundam Society being the first academic institution based on an animated TV series.[4]

Contents  [hide] 
1	Overview
1.1	Concept
1.2	Innovation
1.3	Narrative
1.3.1	Timelines
1.3.2	Definition of Gundam
1.4	Spinoffs
2	Franchise
2.1	TV series, films, and video
2.2	Eras Featured
2.3	Manga and novels
2.4	Video games
2.5	Gundam model
2.6	Other Merchandise
2.7	Internet
3	Global debut
4	Impact
5	See also
6	References
7	External links
Overview[edit]
Concept[edit]
Mobile Suit Gundam was principally developed by renowned animator Yoshiyuki Tomino, along with a changing group of Sunrise creators who went under the collective pseudonym of "Hajime Yatate".

During its conceptual phase, the series was titled Freedom Fighter Gunboy, or simply Gunboy for the gun the robot was armed with, and the primary target demographic were shnen (boys). In the early production stages, there were numerous references to the word "freedom": the White Base was originally "Freedom's Fortress", the Core Fighter was the "Freedom Wing", and the Gunperry was the "Freedom Cruiser". The Yatate team combined the English word "gun" with the last syllable of the word "freedom" to form the portmanteau name Gundom. Tomino then changed it to the current title, suggesting that Gundam signified a powerful unit wielding a gun powerful enough to hold back enemies, like a hydroelectric dam holding back floods.[5] In keeping with this concept, Gundam in all media that followed are often depicted as singularly unique or limited-production, with much higher capabilities than mass-produced units.

Most Gundam are large, bipedal, humanoid-shaped vehicles controlled from cockpits by a human pilot. The majority of these "mobile suits" have a cockpit in the "torso" of the machine, with a camera built into the "head" to transmit images to the cockpit and are non-sentient machines.

Innovation[edit]
Mobile Suit Gundam is said to have pioneered the real robot subgenre of mecha anime.[6]

Unlike its super robot cousins, Mobile Suit Gundam attempted a realism in the robot design and weaponry, by running out of energy and ammunition or breaking and malfunctioning. The technology is practical and is either derived from true science (such as Lagrange points in space and the O'Neill cylinder as a living environment) or at least well-explained, feasible technology, requiring only a few fictional elements to function (such as Minovsky Physics as a means of energy production from helium-3).[7] One difficulty, however, is that the designation for each O'Neill cylinder does not relate to the standard terms for the Lagrange points. For example, both of the first two television series begin in a colony at Lagrange point L3, as part of a group which is called both Side 7, and, in Zeta Gundam, by a sort of geographical name of "Noa".

The necessity of developing humanoid robots is also explained, albeit fictional. The fictional Minovsky particle pervasive in Universal Century is depicted as interfering with radar-guided long-distance cruise missiles, anti-aircraft guns, missiles, and all early warning systems, with weapons systems having to rely on human eyes. In Universal Century, the space-based Principality of Zeon rebels against Earth Federation, requiring a weapons system that could function in zero and normal gravity and be able to open and close air locks, plant demolition charges, and engage with enemy tanks and planes; with a robotic giant being an excellent choice. Once mobile suits have been developed by one side, the opposing force had to develop a similar system, just as British invention of tanks lead to the development of tanks in Germany, and eventually led to tank-to-tank battles.

Narrative[edit]
The general narratives of Gundam shows classify as war drama. They revolve around the mobile suits and their pilots fighting in a war, in which destruction and dehumanization are inherent, through multiple sides; each faction has their own heroes and villains, all of which have their own unique motives, failings, and virtues. Gundam features political battles and debates on important philosophical issues and political ideals on the nature and meaning of war, the ideal of pacifism, and the continuing evolution  natural or engineered  of humanity and its consequences. These are often framed in the series as a debate between the protagonist and antagonist over the course of a duel, as they try to convince each other of the righteousness of their causes. Most of the stories are structured as "coming-of-age" dramas, where the main cast's personalities, points of view, allegiances, goals, and actions may or may not change dramatically as events unfold. This makes the plot seem more realistic than earlier super robot animated series where the hero and cast usually act in the same predictable manner, with little connection between the episodes. The best example of this is how the personalities of longtime rivals, Amuro Ray and Char Aznable, are influenced by their experiences in the Gundam saga.

Timelines[edit]
The majority of Gundam animation, including the earliest series, occur in the Universal Century (UC) calendar era, with later series set in alternate calendars or timelines mostly unrelated to the UC system that have begun to be connected in the canon with Correct Century. The creation of the separate timelines were originally stand-alone works that did not require prior knowledge of the Universal Century timeline to understand or appreciate the story's background. These timelines define Gundam differently and portray conflicts in entirely different settings and circumstances to other entries, including the definition of Gundam. For example, the original Gundam was considered a military general-purpose prototype mobile suit and a "Gundam" from G Gundam is considered a name for a mobile fighter whose purpose is to compete against other Gundams.

Definition of Gundam[edit]
Within the Gundam franchise, the titular term "Gundam" generally refers to a specific category of mobile suits that tend to feature design cues from Kunio Okawara's original Gundam design. Nonetheless, producer Masahiko Asano wrote in his notes on the production of Gundam Sentinel that everyone seemed to have their own idea of Gundam and, in the meeting, they were trying to find the asymptotic view for those there.[8] The variations in naming and identification impacts the definition of the term throughout the Gundam timelines:

In the original Universal Century timeline, "Gundam" is the name of the Earth Federation's first experimental general-purpose mobile suit, and mobile suits based off its design. In this timeline, Gundam often stands for General-purpose Utility, Non Discontinuity Augmentation Maneuvering weapon system."[9][10]
In the Future Century timeline of Mobile Fighter G Gundam, the word "Gundam" refers to class of mobile weapons, mostly refer to mobile fighters that participate in the "Gundam Fight", a competition that determines which colony would rule the Earth every four years.
In the After Colony timeline of Mobile Suit Gundam Wing, the word "Gundam" refers to most mobile suits constructed out of a special alloy called "Gundanium".
In the After War timeline of After War Gundam X, advanced mobile suits built from lunar titanium alloy before and during the After War era are referred to as Gundam.
In the Correct Century timeline of Turn A Gundam, the name "Gundam" is given to the WD-M01 Turn A Gundam mobile suit by a specific character, who was originally an ace pilot, but was placed under suspended animation. The color scheme of the Turn A reminds the character of the Gundam mobile suits from previous eras.
In the Cosmic Era timeline of Mobile Suit Gundam SEED, the word Gundam is generally not referenced, but certain characters use the term to describe mobile suits that carry specific types of operating systems, whose acronym always spells "G.U.N.D.A.M."
In the Anno Domini timeline of Mobile Suit Gundam 00, the term Gundam is the generic designation of a line of unique and highly effective mobile units that were built by the anti-war organization Celestial Being to use the GN-Drive. Eventually that technology spread to non-Gundam mobile suits as well.
In the Advanced Generation of Mobile Suit Gundam AGE, the Gundam was a legendary mobile suit developed by ancestors of main character Flit Asuno. When he inherits the AGE Device from his mother, which contains plans of a mobile suit that resembles a painting of the Gundam he saw, he names the new mobile suit (and its successive models) after it.
In the Post Disaster timeline of Mobile Suit Gundam: Iron-Blooded Orphans Gundams are a series of 72 mobile suits built on a specific frame design during the Calamity War 300 years prior to the series' events. All of these Gundams are named after demons in the Ars Goetia.
Spinoffs[edit]
Over the years, other types of narratives and settings have been developed as the franchise grew and diversified. SD Gundam, a sub-franchise of Gundam that started in the mid-1980s, features Gundam mecha and characters expressed in super deformed and anthropomorphic style while placing them in historical, fantastical or science fiction settings, with greater emphasis on comedy and adventure. In addition, a recent development in Gundam animated works is to feature a more contemporary setting and use Gunpla as a central plot element, as seen in shows like Model Suit Gunpla Builders Beginning G and Gundam Build Fighters.

Franchise[edit]
TV series, films, and video[edit]
Except for Mobile Suit Gundam 00 which follows the current calendar era, all mainstream Gundam series are set into their own fictional era which begins after some drastic event or chain of events (sometimes left unexplained) occur in history. Another common feature is that the scenario changes constantly as the story progresses between Earth, outer space, space colonies and in some cases, even the Moon and some terraformed planets as well.

Eras Featured[edit]
Universal Century (U.C.) (Featured Space Colonies: The 7 Sides) (Featured Mechanical Mascot: Haro)
Future Century (F.C.) (Featured Space Colonies: Neo Japan, Neo America, Neo China, Neo France, Neo Russia, etc.)
After Colony (A.C.) (Featured Space Colonies: The 5 Stanford Torus')
After War (A.W.) (Featured Space Colony: Cloud 9)
Correct Century (C.C.)
Cosmic Era (C.E.) (Featured Space Colonies: PLANT) (Featured Mechanical Mascots: Haro & Birdy)
Anno Domini (A.D.) (Featured Space Colonies: The 3 Bernal Spheres, Colony Plant) (Featured Mechanical Mascot: Haro)
Advanced Generation (A.G.) (Featured Space Colonies: Angel, Ovan, Nora, Fardain, Minsry, Tordia, Solon City, Nortram, Second Moon) (Featured Mechanical Mascot: Haro)
Regild Century (R.C.) (Featured Space Colonies: Towasanga, Venus Globe) (Featured Mechanical Mascot: HaroBe)
Post Disaster (P.D.) (Featured Space Colonies: Saisei, Dort Colonies)
Name	Media	Year(s)	MSG Date
Mobile Suit Gundam	TV series	1979C1980	U.C. 0079
Compilation movies	1981C1982
Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam	TV series	1985C1986	U.C. 0087C88
Compilation movies	2005C2006
Mobile Suit Gundam ZZ	TV series	1986C1987	U.C. 0088C89
Mobile Suit Gundam: Char's Counterattack	Movie	1988	U.C. 0093
Mobile Suit SD Gundam	Movies	1988, 1989, 1991, 1993	Various
OVA	1989C1991
Compilation TV series	1993
Mobile Suit Gundam 0080: War in the Pocket	OVA	1989	U.C. 0079C80
Mobile Suit Gundam F91	Movie	1991	U.C. 0123
Mobile Suit Gundam 0083: Stardust Memory	OVA	1991C1992	U.C. 0083
Compilation movie	1992
Mobile Suit Victory Gundam	TV series	1993C1994	U.C. 0153
Mobile Fighter G Gundam	TV series	1994C1995	F.C. 60
Mobile Suit Gundam Wing	TV series	1995C1996	A.C. 195
Compilation OVA	1996
Mobile Suit Gundam: The 08th MS Team	OVA	1996	U.C. 0079
Compilation movie	1998
After War Gundam X	TV series	1996	A.W. 0015
Gundam Wing: Endless Waltz	OVA	1997	A.C. 196C197
Compilation movie	1998
Turn A Gundam	TV series	1999C2000	C.C. 2345
Compilation movies	2002
G-Saviour	Live-action movie	2000	U.C. 0223
Gundam Neo Experience 0087: Green Diver	Specialty format movie	2001	U.C. 0087
Gundam Evolve	Animated shorts	2001C2005	Various
Mobile Suit Gundam SEED	TV series	2002C2003	C.E. 71
Compilation specials	2004
Superior Defender Gundam Force	TV series	2003C2004	Unknown
Mobile Suit Gundam MS IGLOO: The Hidden One Year War	Movies	2004	U.C. 0079
Mobile Suit Gundam SEED Destiny	TV series	2004C2005	C.E. 73
Compilation specials	2006C2007
Mobile Suit Gundam MS IGLOO: Apocalypse 0079	OVA	2006	U.C. 0079
Mobile Suit Gundam SEED C.E. 73: Stargazer	ONA	2006	C.E. 73
Mobile Suit Gundam 00	TV series	2007C2009	A.D. 2307C2312
Compilation specials	2009
Mobile Suit Gundam MS IGLOO 2: The Gravity Front	OVA	2009	U.C. 0079
Mobile Suit Gundam Unicorn	OVA	2010C2014	U.C. 0096
Compilation TV series[11]	2016
SD Gundam Sangokuden Brave Battle Warriors	Movie	2010	Unknown
TV series
Mobile Suit Gundam 00 the Movie: A Wakening of the Trailblazer	Movie	2010	A.D. 2314
Model Suit Gunpla Builders Beginning G	OVA	2010	A.D. 2010
Mobile Suit Gundam AGE[12]	TV Series	2011C2012	A.G. 115, 140C142, 164, 201
OVA
Gundam Build Fighters	TV series	2013C2014[13]	A.D. 20??
Mobile Suit Gundam-san[14]	TV series	2014	U.C. 0079
Gundam Reconguista in G[15]	TV series	2014C2015	R.C. 1014[16]
Gundam Build Fighters Try	TV series	2014C2015[17]	A.D. 20??
Mobile Suit Gundam: The Origin[18]	OVA[19]	2015C2016[15]	U.C. 0068C0079
Mobile Suit Gundam: Iron-Blooded Orphans[20]	TV series	2015Cpresent	P.D. 323[21]
Mobile Suit Gundam Thunderbolt[22]	ONA	2015C2016	U.C. 0079C0080
Manga and novels[edit]
Main article: List of Gundam manga and novels
The manga narration of the original series is published in English in North America by a variety of companies, such as Viz Media, Del Rey Manga, and TOKYOPOP, among others, and in Singapore by Chuang Yi.

Video games[edit]
Main article: List of Gundam video games
Following the popularity of Gundam, various video games feature original characters previously not found in other media. Over 80 different Gundam games have been created for arcade, computer and console platforms. A video game series based on the popular Dynasty Warriors video game resulted in the Dynasty Warriors: Gundam games. Some of the video games would go on to have spinoff novels and manga. Most Gundam video games can only be found in Japan with little release to the world market (Dynasty Warriors: Gundam series is an exception).

Gundam model[edit]
Main article: Gundam model
Models of the Gundam robots are a major reason for the franchise's enduring success, which began in the 1980s. Hundreds of models, primarily plastic but sometimes featuring resin, metal and other types of detail parts, have been released. These range in quality from children's toy kits, to hobbyist and museum-grade models. Most models are of 1:35, 1:48, 1:60, 1:100 or 1:144 scale. Special promotional models of 1:6 or 1:12 scale are targeted to retailers and are not commercially available. One full size model was also constructed and displayed in Tokyo's Odaiba, and later in Shizuoka.

Other Merchandise[edit]
Bandai, the primary licensee of the Gundam trademark, makes a variety of products for the Gundam fan. Other companies produce unofficial merchandise such as toys, models, and T-shirts. Categories of products include the "Mobile Suit In Action" ("MSiA") action figures, and Gundam Model Kits in several scales and design complexity. Generally, each series listed above will have its own set of products, although the MSiA and models lines, such as Master Grade and High Grade Universal Century, may extend across series. The most popular line of action figure in recent years; however, is the "Gundam Fix" series. This line of figures includes the mecha shown in the animated series/manga/novels, but also includes new accessories to create a more updated version. In addition to Master Grade and High Grade Gundams, Bandai released yet another series of Gundam models in 2010 for the 30th anniversary of Gundam.[23] The release of the real grade Gundam series led to a revolutionary way to build Gundam kits; real grade Gundam series combined the detailed inner structures of master grade versions and added an additional colour separation making the tiny 1/144 scaled real grade series complex in design and compact in size. After the introduction of the RG Gundam series, Bandai released the Metal Build series in March 2011 beginning with the 00 (double 0) Gundam. The Metal Build Gundam is more than an expensive action figure capable of multiple poses made available through the fixed joints, "it's a game changer" according to Bandai. Each Metal Build release features the best that Bandai has to offer in toy engineering, design, sculpt, posability, durability, and what many Gundam enthusiasts have desired, more significant diecast content.[24] Gundam model kits and action figures coexist with the Gundam animated series, Perfect grade Gundams and 1/64 series are also continuous products of Bandai's production line.

Internet[edit]
Bandai maintains a number of sites to promote various Gundam projects. Most prominent amongst these is "Gundam Perfect Web", the official Japanese site. Its English language counterpart is the US maintained "Gundam Official". For a brief trial period in 2005, the site hosted the "Gundam Official User Forum". On July 2, 2013 another "Gundam Official" site will be launched.[needs update] These forums were based on the existing fan forum, "Gundam Watch", and made use of many of its staff. When the project was retired, Gundam Watch was reborn, before passing the torch onto "Gundam Evolution", which maintained many of the same traditions and staff.

A number of series specific websites have been produced. These are often available for a limited time, usually to promote a DVD release. Common content includes character and mecha listings, lists of related merchandise and pay-for-download content. "Special" pages are also frequent, often presenting downloadable wallpaper or a small game. The Superior Defender Gundam Force site, for example, offers a game where players take the role of the villain Commander Sazabi, attempting to blast his subordinate with his weapons. After completion, users are rewarded with a papercraft of the Ark fans featured frequently in the show's second half.

Global debut[edit]
Since 1980, Gundam has been seen all over the world, having debuted in the following countries:

Country	Year of Debut
Italy Italy
Hong Kong Hong Kong	1980
Taiwan Taiwan
China China
Thailand Thailand	1981
Singapore Singapore
Malaysia Malaysia
South Korea Korea	1982
Philippines Philippines	1983
Indonesia Indonesia	1987
United States United States
Canada Canada
Mexico Latin America
Australia Australia & New Zealand
Europe The Rest of Europe	1994
Impact[edit]
Main article: Cultural impact of Gundam
Gundam is a popular cultural icon of Japan; it is a 50 billion yen business of Bandai Namco (projected 50 billion yen income of the company and reached a highest number of 54.5 billion yen in 2006).[25] Not only were stamps published, an employee of the Agriculture Ministry was reprimanded for contribution to Japanese Wikipedia Gundam related pages,[26] the Japanese Self Defense Forces code-named its developing advance personal combat system as Gundam, and the Fire department used Gundam to promote the future of fire fighting developments. A tram station stood a monument of the original Gundam and used the main theme of the first Gundam anime as its departure melody and other businesses like Mitsubishi not only created a test-type simulator for concept cars with a version of Gundam cockpit, it also held recruitment seminars using "How to make a Gundam" as a demo of what their development process is and based their Lancer Evolution design on Gundam. Isuzu also used a Gundam to model the VX2. A conference as a preparation for the "International Gundam Society" (H) was held on the August 24 in Hiroshima, using Gundam as the main topic to discuss about the relationship of the science and technology in science fiction anime and the real world. The Gundam metaverse makes regular appearances in the Super Robot Wars series by Banpresto.

Gundam's realistic scientific setting has gained a reputation in the field itself as well. On July 18, 2007, MIT's Astronautics Department's Professor (now Deputy Administrator of NASA)[27] Dava Newman displayed a Bio-Suit, the headline "Mobile Suit Gundam's Normal Suit is now real" by various news agencies.[28][29] On February 14, 2008, when NASA proposed research into nuclear thermal rockets, Technobahn, a scientific journal in Japan, referred to the usage of nuclear thermal rocket engines on mobile suits in the Gundam universe.[30]

During the clip shown in a special interview about the analysis of military force of Japan on June 30, 2015 on China Central Television Channel 4, the Japan Self-Defense Forces was shown to have already utilizing several Gundams like Z Plus and RX-78-2 in it.,[31] China netizens responded to the news ranging from saying China is going to lose for sure if Japan really has Gundams or are angry and say that CCTV is actually the dog of Japan. The clip showing RX-78-2 was actually from a commercial for Nissin Cup Noodles in Japan.[32]

See also[edit]
Bandai Museum
References[edit]
^ Jump up to: a b Bandai Namco Fiscal Year 2014 Financial Statement
Jump up ^ TV anime sales history total sales figure ranking averaged by episode, Latest version. TVvTOP25
Jump up ^ Flow of the Japan toy industry (bI), Japan Economics Department, Information section (Ugn)
Jump up ^ Gundam cartoon academy to turn science fiction into reality in Japan[dead link]
Jump up ^ Gundam Archives, production notes
Jump up ^ Oppliger, John (2007-10-12). "Ask John: Which Gundam Series Have Had the Most Impact on Anime?". AnimeNation. Retrieved 2009-07-28.
Jump up ^ Gundam Science, The High Frontier - G.K. O'neil's Space colonization plan, Gundam Century, Out Magazine special edition, Renewal Version
Jump up ^ What's "Sentinel", Masahiko Asano, Model Graphix Special Edition "Gundam Wars III" Gundam Sentinel The battle of "Real Gundam", ISBN 4-499-20530-1
Jump up ^ Gundam Sentinel
Jump up ^ Gundam Officials
Jump up ^ http://www.animenewsnetwork.com/news/2016-02-20/gundam-uc-anime-gets-tv-broadcast-with-new-opening-ending-themes/.98914
Jump up ^ "Level 5 to Help Create Gundam AGE Anime This Fall (Updated) - News". Anime News Network. 2011-06-09. Retrieved 2012-02-17.
Jump up ^ johnny ridden. "GUNDAM GUY: Gundam Build Fighters Season 2 - New Series Project In Progress!".
Jump up ^ "Mobile Suit Gundam-san 4-Panel Gag Manga Gets Anime". Anime News Network. June 24, 2014. Retrieved June 24, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b "Gundam's 35th Year Marked With Reconguista in G, The Origin". Anime News Network. 2014-03-20. Retrieved 2014-03-20.
Jump up ^ "Story G".  G.
Jump up ^ "`".
Jump up ^ "Gundam The Origin Manga to Launch Anime Project - News". Anime News Network. 2011-06-22. Retrieved 2012-02-17.
Jump up ^ ""Gundam The Origin" episode 1 90-second trailer released!". Gundam.info. 2014-05-31. Retrieved 2014-07-07.
Jump up ^ "C". C.
Jump up ^ Mobile Suit Gundam IRON-BLOODED ORPHANS PV. 14 July 2015 C via YouTube.
Jump up ^ "C `". C `.
Jump up ^ Suzuki, Toshiyuki. "RX-78-2 Gundam (RG) (Gundam Model Kits)". Hobby Search Co., Ltd. Retrieved 12 August 2013.
Jump up ^ "METAL BUILD FREEDOM GUNDAM". Gundamplanet.com. Retrieved 12 August 2013.
Jump up ^ Nekkei BP mook, Otona no Gundamu Perfect (Gundam for Adult's Perfect), Business & History+Character+Mechanic, Nekkei Entertainment, ISBN 978-4-8222-6317-1
Jump up ^ "Japanese workers in Wikipedia row". BBC News Online. October 5, 2007. Retrieved 2009-10-01.
Jump up ^ Sharkey, Jim (Nov 15, 2015). "Dava Newman Starts Work as NASA's Deputy Administrator". Spaceflight Insider. Retrieved 19 May 2015.
Jump up ^ technobahn, C``Fg[dead link]
Jump up ^ Ming Pao, July 19, 2007
Jump up ^ technobahn d? NASA_k[dead link]
Jump up ^ http://headlines.yahoo.co.jp/hl?a=20150703-00000004-xinhua-cn
Jump up ^ http://headlines.yahoo.co.jp/hl?a=20150703-00000004-jct-ent
External links[edit]
	Wikiquote has quotations related to: Gundam
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gundam.
Official Gundam website (Japanese)
GundamOfficial Official website for Gundam in North America
Gundam at DMOZ
Gundam (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia
Gundam at the Mecha Anime Headquarters website'
Gundam Perfect Games (Japanese)
Bandai Visual's Gundam minisite (Japanese)
[hide] v t e
Gundam
TV series	
Mobile Suit Gundam (1979) Zeta Gundam (1985) Gundam ZZ (1986) Victory Gundam (1993) G Gundam (1994) Gundam Wing (1995) Gundam X (1996) Turn A Gundam (1999) Gundam SEED (2002) Gundam SEED Destiny (2004) Gundam 00 (2007) Gundam AGE (2011) Build Fighters (2013) Gundam-san (2014) Reconguista in G (2014) Build Fighters Try (2014) Iron-Blooded Orphans (2015)
Films	
Char's Counterattack (1988) Gundam F91 (1991) G-Saviour (2000 live action film) Gundam 00: A Wakening of the Trailblazer (2010)
OVA/ONA	
0080: War in the Pocket (1989) 0083: Stardust Memory (1991) The 08th MS Team (1996) Gundam Wing: Endless Waltz (1997) Gundam Evolve (2001) MS IGLOO (2004) Gundam SEED C.E. 73: Stargazer (2006) Gundam Unicorn (2010) Gunpla Builders Beginning G (2010) Gundam The Origin (2015) Gundam Thunderbolt (2015) Gundam Build Fighters Try: Island Wars (2016)
Novels and manga	
Gundam Sentinel (1987 novel) Gaia Gear (1987 novel) Hathaway's Flash (1989 novel) Crossbone Gundam (1994 manga) Blue Destiny (1997 manga) Gundam-san (2001 manga) cole du Ciel (2002 manga) Gundam The Origin (2002 manga) Gundam SEED Astray (2002 manga) Gundam Thoroughbred (2003 manga) Gundam SEED Destiny Astray (2004 manga) Gundam SEED C.E. 73  Astray (2006 manga) Gundam Alive (2006 manga) Gundam Unicorn (2007 novel) Gundam Thunderbolt (2012 manga)
Music	
Ai Senshi ZR I, Senshi: Ai Senshi Tribute Gundam Tribute from Lantis Gundam Rock
Characters	
Original series Zeta Gundam Gundam ZZ Victory Gundam G Gundam Gundam Wing Gundam X Turn A Gundam Gundam SEED Gundam SEED Astray Gundam 00 Gundam Unicorn Gundam AGE Gundam Build Fighters Gundam Build Fighters Try Gundam: Iron-Blooded Orphans
Mobile weapons	
Gundam Gundam Mk-II MS-06 Zaku II Psyco Gundam RB-79 Ball Z Gundam ZZ Gundam
Related	
Universal Century technology Models Video games SD Gundam Gundam War Collectible Card Game Cultural impact
Wikipedia book Book Category Category
Categories: GundamBandai VisualBandai brandsMedia franchisesSunrise (company)1979 introductionsAsteroid mining in fiction
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Languages
???????
?e?tina
Deutsch
Espa?ol
?????
Fran?ais
???
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
?????
Magyar
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
Z
Norsk nynorsk
Polski
Portugus
Roman?

Simple English
Suomi
Tagalog
???
?
Ti?ng Vi?t
Z

Edit links
This page was last modified on 17 July 2016, at 05:46.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Zeta Gundam" redirects here. For the eponymous mobile suit, see Z Gundam.
Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam
ZetaBluRay2.jpg
Cover for the 2nd Original Remastered BluRay Box Set, depicting the MSZ-006 Z Gundam.
C
(Kid Senshi Zta Gandamu)
Genre	Military science fiction, Space opera
Anime television series
Directed by	Yoshiyuki Tomino
Produced by	Kenji Uchida
Kuniaki Ohnishi
Toru Moriyama
Written by	Hajime Yatate
Music by	Shigeaki Saegusa
Studio	Nippon Sunrise
Licensed by	
NA
Sunrise
AUS
Madman Entertainment
Network	Nagoya Broadcasting Network, TV Asahi, Animax
Original run	March 2, 1985 C February 22, 1986
Episodes	50 (List of episodes)
Manga
Written by	Kazuhisa Kondo
Published by	Kodansha
Demographic	Children
Magazine	Comic Bon Bon
Original run	March 1985 C February 1986
Volumes	3
Anime film
Zeta Gundam A New Translation: Heirs to the Stars
Directed by	Yoshiyuki Tomino
Studio	Sunrise
Licensed by	
NA
Sunrise
Released	May 28, 2005
Runtime	95 minutes
Anime film
Zeta Gundam A New Translation II: Lovers
Directed by	Yoshiyuki Tomino
Studio	Sunrise
Licensed by	
NA
Sunrise
Released	October 29, 2005
Runtime	90 minutes
Anime film
Zeta Gundam A New Translation III: Love is the Pulse of the Stars
Directed by	Yoshiyuki Tomino
Studio	Sunrise
Licensed by	
NA
Sunrise
Released	March 4, 2006
Runtime	100 minutes
Manga
Mobile Suit Z Gundam Define
Written by	Hiroyuki Kitazume
Published by	Kadokawa Shoten
Demographic	Seinen
Magazine	Gundam Ace
Original run	June 25, 2011 C present
Volumes	8
icon Anime and Manga portal
Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam (Japanese: C Hepburn: Kid Senshi Zta Gandamu?) is a 1985 Japanese television anime series, the second installment in the Gundam franchise, and a sequel to the original Mobile Suit Gundam. The show was created and directed by Yoshiyuki Tomino, with character designs by Yoshikazu Yasuhiko, while the series' mechanical designs is split among Kunio Okawara, Mamoru Nagano, and Kazumi Fujita. The series was originally aired on Nagoya Broadcasting Network and its sister ANN stations between 1985 and 1986. Between 2005 and 2006, the series was reproduced and compiled into a movie trilogy, Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam: A New Translation. Though still directed by Tomino, it involved many changes in the original storyline.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Plot summary
2	Media
2.1	Television series
2.2	Manga
2.3	Compilation movies
2.4	Games
3	International release
4	Soundtrack and Scores
5	Production
6	Reception
6.1	Critical reception
7	See also
8	References
9	External links
Plot summary[edit]
Main article: List of Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam characters
Set in the year Universal Century (UC) 0087, eight years after the events of Mobile Suit Gundam (0079), the series follows a rebel group called the Anti-Earth Union Group (AEUG) as they try to defeat the Titans, an elite task force of the Earth Federation designed to hunt down Zeon remnants but which ruthlessly kills anyone demanding equal rights for the space citizens in cold blood.

The story of Zeta Gundam is told through the viewpoint of Kamille Bidan, a civilian teenager and amateur mobile suit pilot whose parents are engineers working for the Earth Federation and the Titans. While traveling to the Green Noa colony to meet his parents, Kamille is insulted by and strikes a Titans officer named Jerid Messa. Following an AEUG attack led by Quattro Bajeerna on the colony to capture a trio of Gundam Mk-II mobile suits undergoing field tests, Kamille takes the opportunity to steal Messa's Mk-II to repel the attack and follows Quattro back to the AEUG mothership Argama. The Titans, under the order of Bask Om, take Kamille's parents in an attempt to force the return of the stolen Gundam Mk-II's. Jerid, unaware of the hostage plot, mistakenly kills Kamille's mother. Because of this, and many other reasons, Kamille eventually joins the AEUG.

As the war escalates, Kamille encounters people from all sides of the conflict, including brainwashed Titans, artificial Newtypes and the leaders of Anaheim Electronics, who are secretly funding the AEUG. The AEUG eventually launch a full-scale attack on the Earth Federation's assembly at Dakar, leading to an Earth Sphere civil war. Quattro reveals himself to be Char Aznable and presents evidence of the Titans' tyranny including using G3 nerve gas on a defenseless colony. The Earth Federation court soon rules the Titans' actions to be illegal and backs the AEUG in hunting down Titans leader Jamitov Hymem.

After losing the support of the Earth Federation, the Titans turn to their original enemy, remnants of the Principality of Zeon now known as Axis Zeon, to form an alliance to regain control of the Earth Sphere. Axis Zeon's leader Haman Karn contacts the AEUG, using the civil war of the Earth Federation at hand to politically ask for the control of Side 3, the former Zeon colony.

Axis involvement and Jamitov's assassination by Jupiter Fleet commander Paptimus Scirocco soon leads to a battle over the colony headquarters of the Titans, Gryps, which has been modified to be a colony laser. The war ends when Kamille, piloting the titular mobile suit Z Gundam, kills Scirocco in battle and the AEUG sinks Scirocco's flagship and most of the Titans' fleet. However, Kamille himself is psychologically broken and although survives without any physical harm to him or the Zeta Gundam, becomes mentally unstable with signs of memory lapse and/or insanity.

The series concludes with both the AEUG and Earth Federation, after suffering considerable losses over the course of the war, facing the full force of Axis Zeon, leading into Mobile Suit Gundam ZZ.

Media[edit]
Television series[edit]
Main article: List of Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam episodes
Manga[edit]
A manga adaptation of the series was released by Kodansha under the Comic Bon Bon label in 1994, three volumes were serialized.[citation needed] An official manga remake was also made entitled Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam Define (C Define Kid Senshi Zta Gandamu Define?). This remake was written and illustrated by Hiroyuki Kitazume and serialized in Gundam Ace in June 25, 2011.

Compilation movies[edit]

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
In celebration of Gundam's 25th anniversary (and also the 20th anniversary of Zeta Gundam), the 50-episode series was compiled into a movie trilogy called Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam: A New Translation. According to Tomino, the movies were created to fix some of the problems he identified in the television series and to bring it into a 21st-century context for a new generation now experiencing the increasingly commercialized series, such as Mobile Suit Gundam SEED. The first movie, Heirs to the Stars, opened on May 28, 2005, followed by Lovers on October 29, 2005, and Love is the Pulse of the Stars on March 6, 2006.

The compilations digitally remastered the television series of Zeta Gundam with new footage. Around 33% of "Heir to the Stars" was remastered footage, with 70% for "Lovers" and almost 80% for "Love is the Pulse of the Stars". However, several major plot events from the TV series were either edited or removed to allow the films to flow more smoothly, unlike Tomino's previous Gundam film compilations. Likewise, the fate of some characters in the television version were entirely changed, notably Kamille's  in the original, his final battle renders him into a vegetative state, while he remains physically and mentally fit by the end of the movie trilogy. In addition, mobile suits belonging to the Gundam timeline, but designed after the television broadcast of Zeta Gundam, were also placed into the movies.

Shigeaki Saegusa's musical score from the TV series was reused for the films, with the addition of new songs by J-pop artist Gackt. A music video for the first film's opening theme "Metamorphoze" featured Gackt singing inside a mobile suit cockpit during battle.

Majority of the original TV voice cast returned to reprise their respective roles. Y Inoue, who died in 2003 - was posthumously credited, as an archived recording of her voice was used for a cameo appearance of Sayla Mass in the third film. There were some changes to the voice cast - namely Yukana replacing Saeko Shimazu as Four Murasame, Satomi Arai replacing Miyuki Matsuoka as Fa Yuiry, and a few others. This change sparked controversy among fans, who suspected that Yukana used her relationship with sound director Sadayoshi Fujino to land her role.[1] The films were a box office success in Japan.[2]

Games[edit]

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
In 1985, Bandai released a special boardgame based on the series. Designed for two to four players, Mobile Suit Gundam: Take Off MKII has a paper map and 12 miniatures of various AEUG and Titans mobile suits, plus game rules and mission files. Kid Senshi Z-Gundam: Hot Scramble followed in 1986. the first Gundam video game for home consoles, Hot Scramble featured first-person and side-scrolling stages. this would be followed by a 3D-fighting game, Mobile Suit Z Gundam, for the Sony PlayStation in 1997. Featuring remastered cutscenes from the series, it comes on two discs, allowing players to experience the series from the viewpoints of Kamille and Char. Bandai later added the series' mobile suits as part of Gundam Vs. Zeta Gundam in 2004.

In addition, Tecmo Koei and Namco Bandai have included the series in Dynasty Warriors: Gundam franchise ever since the first one came out in 2007, and it's still going strong up to this point.

International release[edit]

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The show has been placed on rerun on the anime satellite television network, Animax, across Japan and later its respective networks worldwide, including East Asia, Southeast Asia, South Asia, and other regions.

In 2004, after almost 2 years of delays and failed television and merchandising deals, Bandai released a limited edition Zeta Gundam boxset with dubbed English and original Japanese audio tracks. The English dub was done by Ocean Production's Blue Water Studio based in Calgary in Canada.

Due to Bandai not having rights to the theme songs outside of Asia, the opening and closing sequences were altered. The English subtitles were criticized as inaccurate and appear to be based on the script for the English dub, rather than a direct translation of the original Japanese script. Bandai corrected the subtitles to a properly translated version for later DVD releases in 5 cases with 2 discs each. The box-set includes pencil sharpener collectibles and a 48-page booklet and poster. Each DVD in the Bandai Region 2 release contains five episodes.

In 2006, Bandai Entertainment acquired the rights to the US release of the "A New Translation" movie trilogy, originally slated for release on June 22, 2010 but was later changed to July 6. The series and movies have been out of print, following the closure of Bandai Entertainment.

On October 11, 2014 at their 2014 New York Comic-Con panel, Sunrise announced they will be releasing all of the Gundam franchise, including the Zeta Gundam TV series and movies in North America though distribution from Right Stuf Inc., beginning in Spring 2015.[3]

Soundtrack and Scores[edit]

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
A majority of the series background music was written by Japanese composer Shigeaki Saegusa. The melodies of the two opening themes and sole ending theme were written by American pop singer/songwriter Neil Sedaka. The first opening song used is called Zeta - Toki wo Koete (Z? Zeta - Transcending Times?) which was performed by Mami Ayukawa, and used for the first twenty-three episodes. Zeta - Toki wo Koete was based upon the song "Better Days are Coming" from Sedaka's 1972 album Solitaire. The second opening song used is entitled Mizu no Hoshi e Ai wo Komete ( From the Aqueous Star with Love?) and was performed by Hiroko Moriguchi, this second opening song is used in episodes twenty-four to fifty. The song "Mizu no Hoshi e Ai wo Komete" was derived from an unreleased song entitled "For Us to Decide".

The sole ending song used for the series is called Hoshizora no Believe (Believe Believe in the Starry Sky?) which was sung by Mami Ayukawa. "Hoshizora no Believe" was adapted from the song "Bad and Beautiful" from the 1976 album Steppin' Out. In addition to the opening/ending songs an insert song was also made called Gin'iro Doresu (y Silver Dress?). This song is sung by Hiroko Moriguchi and is used in episode twenty.

The opening and ending songs differed for the North American release version as opposed to the original. The opening song used is called Zeta no Kod ~ Zeta Gundam ( Zeta's Pulse~Zeta Gundam?) which was composed by Saegusa, while the song used for the endings entitled Gurn Noa no Shnen ~ Arata na Sekai (`? Boy from Green Noa ~ A New World?) was also written by Saegusa.

The songs used for the three movies that came out of Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam were all performed by Gackt, and were compiled and released on his tribute album 0079-0088. The first movie Heirs To The Stars uses two songs; Metamorphoze is used as the opening song while Kimi ga Matteiru Kara ( Because you're Waiting?) is used for the ending. The second movie Lovers uses just one new song called Mind Forest for the ending song. Mind Forest is also featured on Gackt's album called "Crescent". The final movie made Love is the Pulse of the Stars uses two new songs. Love Letter is used as an insert song followed by the song Dybbuk which is used as the ending song.

Production[edit]
Yoshiyuki Tomino crammed his frustrations into Zeta Gundam.[4] He created the anime with the idea of telling viewers "Hey, watch my new Gundam, youngsters. Why are you not so lively like them in Z?" Tomino has mixed feelings about Zeta Gundam. Tomino did not like the series and believes he should have ended the story in the first TV series. However, at the same time he noted that thanks to Zeta the franchise became more popular.[5]

Reception[edit]
Critical reception[edit]
The review website Mania.com gave the anime an overall 'B+' rating, regarding it as "one of Yoshiyuki Tomino's greatest works." They stated that the "lack of an A/A+ is that this is recommended for fans who are already familiar with the Universal Century storyline," recommending that audiences view "the original movie trilogy" first before watching Zeta Gundam.[6] The reviewer Chris Beveridge of Mania.com gave certain volumes of the series a full 'A' rating, describing the last ten episodes as being "the huge payoff episodes" where "you can almost feel the characters being rushed around a bit and moved through the paces. But at the same time, it all comes so fast that it's simply enjoyable to watch so much happen and change so quickly."[7]

See also[edit]
Kidou Senshi Z-Gundam: Hot Scramble
References[edit]
Jump up ^ Anime News Network - Seiyuu Change Enrages Fans
Jump up ^ Camp, Brian; Davis, Julie (2007). Anime Classics Zettai!: 100 Must-see Japanese Animation Masterpieces. Stone Bridge Press. p. 222. ISBN 9781933330228.
Jump up ^ "Sunrise Partners with Right Stuf to Release Gundam Franchise Stateside". Anime News Network. 2014-10-11. Retrieved 2014-10-12.
Jump up ^ "Interview: Yoshiyuki Tomino (Updated)". Anime News Network. June 19, 2009. Retrieved December 21, 2013.
Jump up ^ "A Short Talk with Yoshiyuki Tomino". Anime News Network. December 12, 2002. Retrieved November 15, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam Limited Edition Box Set". Mania.com. June 7, 2005. Archived from the original on April 10, 2009. Retrieved 2010-01-19.
Jump up ^ Chris Beveridge (May 31, 2005). "Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam Vol. #09". Mania.com. Archived from the original on April 10, 2009. Retrieved 2010-02-09.
External links[edit]
Official Websites: Anime, A New Translation I, II, III
Subtitled episodes on Daisuki's YouTube channel
Anime Academy Review: Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam at the Wayback Machine (archived February 9, 2012)
Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia
Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam at the Internet Movie Database
Preceded by
Mobile Suit Gundam	Gundam metaseries (production order)
1985C1986	Succeeded by
Mobile Suit Gundam ZZ
Preceded by
Mobile Suit Gundam 0083: Stardust Memory	Gundam Universal Century timeline
U.C. 0087-88	Succeeded by
Gundam Sentinel (novel), Mobile Suit Gundam ZZ


[hide] v t e
Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam
Characters Episodes
Mobile Weapons	
Gundam Mk-II Z Gundam Psyco Gundam
Others	
Kid Senshi Z-Gundam: Hot Scramble
[show] v t e
Gundam
[show] v t e
Yoshiyuki Tomino
[show] v t e
Animation Kobe Theatrical Film Award
[show] v t e
Sunrise
Categories: 1985 anime television seriesManga series1985 manga2005 anime films2006 anime films2011 manga2000s science fiction filmsAnimated science fiction filmsAnime featured in the Super Robot Wars seriesBandai Entertainment anime titlesChildren's mangaDengeki ComicsGundam anime and mangaJapanese science fiction filmsSunrise (company)Universal Century
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikiquote
Languages
Espa?ol
Fran?ais
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
Nederlands
Z
Polski
Portugus

Suomi
???

Edit links
This page was last modified on 5 July 2016, at 10:48.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
Shanghai
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Shanghai (disambiguation).
Shanghai

Municipality
Shanghai Municipality
Clockwise from top: A view of the Pudong skyline, Yu Garden, China Pavilion along with the Expo Axis, neon signs on Nanjing Road, and The Bund
Clockwise from top: A view of the Pudong skyline, Yu Garden, China Pavilion along with the Expo Axis, neon signs on Nanjing Road, and The Bund
Official seal of Shanghai
Seal
Etymology:  (Shngh?i P)
"The original name of the Huangpu River."
Location of Shanghai Municipality in China
Location of Shanghai Municipality in China
Coordinates: 311343N 1212829ECoordinates: 311343N 1212829E
Country	People's Republic of China
Settled	5thC7th century
Incorporated
 - city	
751
 - County	1292
 - Municipality	7 July 1927
Divisions
 - County-level
 - Township-
level	
16 districts
210 towns and subdistricts
Government
 ? Type	Municipality
 ? Party Secretary	Han Zheng
 ? Mayor	Yang Xiong
 ? Congress Chairman	Yin Yicui
 ? Conference Chairman	Wu Zhiming
Area[1][2][3]
 ? Municipality	6,340.5 km2 (2,448.1 sq mi)
 ? Water	697 km2 (269 sq mi)
Elevation[4]	4 m (13 ft)
Population (2015)[5]
 ? Municipality	24,152,700
 ? Rank	1st in China
 ? Density	3,800/km2 (9,900/sq mi)
 ? Metro (2010)[6]	34,000,000
Demonym(s)	Shanghainese
Time zone	China standard time (UTC+8)
Postal code	200000C202100
Area code(s)	21
GDP[7]	2015
 - Total	CNY2.4965 trillion
US$400.83 billion (12th)
 - Per capita	CNY103,100
US$16,553 (3rd)
 - Growth	Increase 6.9%
HDI (2010)	0.814[8] (2nd) C very high
Licence plate prefixes	A, B, D, E, F, G, H, J, K
C (outer suburbs)
City flower	Yulan magnolia
Languages and dialects	Shanghainese,
Mandarin Chinese
Website	www.shanghai.gov.cn
Shanghai
Shanghai (Chinese characters).svg
"Shanghai" in Chinese
Chinese	
Wu	Zaan22 he44
Literal meaning	"Upon-the-Sea"
Transcriptions
Shanghai is the most populous city in both China[9][10] and Asia as well as the most populous city proper in the world.[11] It is one of the four direct-controlled municipalities of China, with a population of more than 24 million as of 2014.[12] It is a global financial center,[13] and a transport hub with the world's busiest container port.[14] Located in the Yangtze River Delta in East China, Shanghai sits on the south edge of the mouth of the Yangtze in the middle portion of the Chinese coast. The municipality borders the provinces of Jiangsu and Zhejiang to the north, south and west, and is bounded to the east by the East China Sea.[15]

For centuries a major administrative, shipping, and trading town, Shanghai grew in importance in the 19th century due to European recognition of its favorable port location and economic potential. The city was one of five forced open to foreign trade following the British victory over China in the First Opium War while the subsequent 1842 Treaty of Nanking and 1844 Treaty of Whampoa allowed the establishment of the Shanghai International Settlement and the French Concession. The city then flourished as a center of commerce between east and west, and became the undisputed financial hub of the Asia-Pacific region in the 1930s.[16] However, with the Communist Party takeover of the mainland in 1949, trade was limited to socialist countries, and the city's global influence declined. In the 1990s, the economic reforms introduced by Deng Xiaoping resulted in an intense re-development of the city, aiding the return of finance and foreign investment to the city.[17]

Shanghai is a popular tourist destination renowned for its historical landmarks such as The Bund, City God Temple, Yu Garden, the extensive Lujiazui skyline, many skyscrapers, and major museums including the Shanghai Museum and the China Art Museum. It has been described as the "showpiece" of the booming economy of mainland China.[18][19]

Contents
1	Names
2	History
2.1	Ancient history
2.2	Imperial history
2.3	Early modern history
2.4	Modern history
3	Geography
3.1	Climate
4	Cityscape
5	Politics
6	Administrative divisions
7	Economy
8	Demographics
9	Religion
10	Education
11	Transport
11.1	Public transport
11.2	Roads
11.3	Railway
11.4	Air
12	Architecture
13	Environment
13.1	Parks and resorts
13.2	Environmental protection
13.3	Air pollution and government reaction
14	Culture
14.1	Language
14.2	Museums
14.3	Cinema
14.4	Arts
14.5	Fashion
15	Media
16	Sports
17	International relations
18	See also
19	References
20	Further reading
21	External links
Names[edit]
The two Chinese characters in the city's name are  (shng, "above") and  (hi, "sea"), together meaning "Upon-the-Sea". The earliest occurrence of this name dates from the 11th-century Song dynasty, at which time there was already a river confluence and a town with this name in the area. There are disputes as to exactly how the name should be understood, but Chinese historians have concluded that during the Tang dynasty Shanghai was literally on the sea.[20]

Shanghai is officially abbreviated  (H) in Chinese,[21] a contraction of  (H D, lit "Harpoon Ditch"),[22][23] a 4th- or 5th-century Jin name for the mouth of Suzhou Creek when it was the main conduit into the ocean.[22] This character appears on all motor vehicle license plates issued in the municipality today.

Another alternative name for Shanghai is Shn () or Shnchng (, "Shen City"), from Lord Chunshen, a third-century BC nobleman and prime minister of the state of Chu, whose fief included modern Shanghai.[22] Sports teams and newspapers in Shanghai often use Shen in their names, such as Shanghai Shenhua F.C. and Shen Bao.

Huating () was another early name for Shanghai. In AD 751, during the mid-Tang dynasty, Huating County was established at modern-day Songjiang, the first county-level administration within modern-day Shanghai. Today, Huating appears as the name of a four-star hotel in the city.[20]

The city also has various nicknames in English, including "Pearl of the Orient" and "Paris of the East".[24][25]

History[edit]
Main article: History of Shanghai
See also: Timeline of Shanghai, Shanghai International Settlement, Shanghai French Concession, and Greater Shanghai Plan

The walled Old City of Shanghai in the 17th century

Shanghai in the 1930s, with the Shanghai International Settlement and Shanghai French Concession
Ancient history[edit]
During the Spring and Autumn period, the Shanghai area belonged to the Kingdom of Wu, which was conquered by the Kingdom of Yue, which in turn was conquered by the Kingdom of Chu.[26] During the Warring States period, Shanghai was part of the fief of Lord Chunshen of Chu, one of the Four Lords of the Warring States. He ordered the excavation of the Huangpu River. Its former or poetic name, the Chunshen River, gave Shanghai its nickname of "Shen".[26] Fishermen living in the Shanghai area created a fishing tool called the hu, which lent its name to the outlet of Suzhou Creek north of the Old City and became a common nickname and abbreviation for the city.

Imperial history[edit]

Square Pagoda at Xingshengjiao Temple built during the Song Dynasty
During the Song dynasty (960C1279) Shanghai was upgraded in status from a village to a market town in 1074, and in 1172 a second sea wall was built to stabilize the ocean coastline, supplementing an earlier dike.[27] From the Yuan dynasty in 1292 until Shanghai officially became a municipality in 1927, central Shanghai was administered as a county under Songjiang Prefecture, whose seat was at the present-day Songjiang District.[28]

Two important events helped promote Shanghai's development in the Ming dynasty. A city wall was built for the first time in 1554 to protect the town from raids by Japanese pirates. It measured 10 metres (33 feet) high and 5 kilometres (3 miles) in circumference.[29] During the Wanli reign (1573C1620), Shanghai received an important psychological boost from the erection of a City God Temple in 1602. This honour was usually reserved for places with the status of a city, such as a prefectural capital not normally given to a mere county town, as Shanghai was. It probably reflected the town's economic importance, as opposed to its low political status.[29]


The Bund in 1928; the WWI monument in the foreground was destroyed by the Japanese during WWII

Nanking Road in the 1930s
File:1937 Shanghai, China VP8.webm
Shanghai filmed in 1937
During the Qing dynasty, Shanghai became one of the most important sea ports in the Yangtze Delta region as a result of two important central government policy changes: In 1684, the Kangxi Emperor reversed the Ming dynasty prohibition on oceangoing vessels C a ban that had been in force since 1525; and in 1732 the Yongzheng Emperor moved the customs office for Jiangsu province (; see Customs House, Shanghai) from the prefectural capital of Songjiang to Shanghai, and gave Shanghai exclusive control over customs collections for Jiangsu's foreign trade. As a result of these two critical decisions, by 1735 Shanghai had become the major trade port for all of the lower Yangtze region, despite still being at the lowest administrative level in the political hierarchy.[30]

Early modern history[edit]
International attention to Shanghai grew in the 19th century due to European recognition of its economic and trade potential at the Yangtze. During the First Opium War (1839C1842), British forces occupied the city. The war ended with the 1842 Treaty of Nanking, which allowed the British to dictate opening the treaty ports, Shanghai included, for international trade.[31] The Treaty of the Bogue signed in 1843, and the Sino-American Treaty of Wanghia signed in 1844 forced Chinese concession to European and American desires for visitation and trade on Chinese soil. Britain, France (under the 1844 Treaty of Whampoa), and the United States all carved out concessions outside the walled city of Shanghai, which was still ruled by the Chinese.

The Chinese-held old city of Shanghai fell to the rebels of the Small Swords Society in 1853 but was recovered by the Qing government in February 1855.[32] In 1854, the Shanghai Municipal Council was created to manage the foreign settlements. Between 1860C1862, the Taiping rebels twice attacked Shanghai and destroyed the city's eastern and southern suburbs, but failed to take the city.[33] In 1863, the British settlement to the south of Suzhou Creek (northern Huangpu District) and the American settlement to the north (southern Hongkou District) joined in order to form the Shanghai International Settlement. The French opted out of the Shanghai Municipal Council and maintained its own concession to the south and southwest.


"Bloody Saturday": a baby in the ruins of the old Shanghai South Railway Station after Japanese bombing in August 1937
Citizens of many countries and all continents came to Shanghai to live and work during the ensuing decades; those who stayed for long periods C some for generations C called themselves "Shanghailanders".[34] In the 1920s and 1930s, almost 20,000 White Russians and Russian Jews fled the newly established Soviet Union and took up residence in Shanghai. These Shanghai Russians constituted the second-largest foreign community. By 1932, Shanghai had become the world's fifth largest city and home to 70,000 foreigners.[35] In the 1930s, some 30,000 Jewish refugees from Europe arrived in the city.[36]

The Sino-Japanese War concluded with the Treaty of Shimonoseki, which elevated Japan to become another foreign power in Shanghai. Japan built the first factories in Shanghai, which were soon copied by other foreign powers. Shanghai was then the most important financial center in the Far East. All this international activity gave Shanghai the nickname "the Great Athens of China"[37]

Under the Republic of China, Shanghai's political status was raised to that of a municipality on 14 July 1927. Although the territory of the foreign concessions was excluded from their control, this new Chinese municipality still covered an area of 828.8 square kilometres (320.0 sq mi), including the modern-day districts of Baoshan, Yangpu, Zhabei, Nanshi, and Pudong. Headed by a Chinese mayor and municipal council, the new city government's first task was to create a new city center in Jiangwan town of Yangpu district, outside the boundaries of the foreign concessions. The "Greater Shanghai Plan" included a public museum, library, sports stadium, and city hall, which were partially constructed when the plan was interrupted by the Japanese invasion.[38]

On 28 January 1932, Japanese forces struck and the Chinese resisted, fighting to a standstill; a ceasefire was brokered in May. The Battle of Shanghai in 1937 resulted in the occupation of the Chinese administered parts of Shanghai outside of the International Settlement and the French Concession. The foreign concessions were occupied by the Japanese on 8 December 1941 and remained occupied until Japan's surrender in 1945, during which time war crimes were committed.[39]

On 27 May 1949, the People's Liberation Army took control of Shanghai. Under the new People's Republic of China (PRC), Shanghai was one of only three municipalities not merged into neighboring provinces over the next decade (the others being Beijing and Tianjin).[40] Shanghai underwent a series of changes in the boundaries of its subdivisions over the next decade. After 1949, most foreign firms moved their offices from Shanghai to Hong Kong, as part of a foreign divestment due to the Communist victory.

Modern history[edit]

Lujiazui Finance and Trade Zone
During the 1950s and 1960s, Shanghai became the center for radical leftism since it was the industrial centre of China with most skilled industrial workers. The radical leftist Jiang Qing and her three cohorts, together the Gang of Four, were based in the city.[41] Yet, even during the most tumultuous times of the Cultural Revolution, Shanghai was able to maintain high economic productivity and relative social stability. During most of the history of the PRC, Shanghai has been a comparatively heavy contributor of tax revenue to the central government, with Shanghai in 1983 contributing more in tax revenue to the central government than Shanghai had received in investment in the prior 33 years combined.[42] This came at the cost of severely crippling welfare of Shanghainese people and Shanghai's infrastructural and capital development. Its importance to the fiscal well-being of the central government also denied it economic liberalizations begun in 1978. Shanghai was finally permitted to initiate economic reforms in 1991, starting the massive development still seen today and the birth of Lujiazui in Pudong.

Geography[edit]
Main article: Geography of Shanghai

This map of Shanghai (center and east), Jiangsu (north), and Zhejiang (south) shows the developed areas around Shanghai, Nanjing (dark green), and Hangzhou in green. Provincial boundaries are in purple, sub-provincial boundaries in gray.
Landsat-7. 15 August 2005.
This natural-color satellite image shows the urban area of Shanghai in 2005, along with its major islands of (from northwest to southeast) Chongming, Changxing, Hengsha, and the Jiuduansha shoals off Pudong.
Shanghai lies on China's east coast roughly equidistant from Beijing and Guangzhou. The Old City and modern downtown Shanghai are now located in the center of an expanding peninsula between the Yangtze River Delta to the north and Hangzhou Bay to the south, formed by the Yangtze's natural deposition and by modern land reclamation projects. The provincial-level Municipality of Shanghai administers both the eastern area of this peninsula and many of its surrounding islands. It is bordered on the north and west by Jiangsu, on the south by Zhejiang, and on the east by the East China Sea. Its northernmost point is on Chongming Island, now the second-largest island in mainland China after its expansion during the 20th century.[43] The municipality does not, however, include an exclave of Jiangsu on northern Chongming or the two islands forming Shanghai's Yangshan Port, which are part of Zhejiang's Shengsi County. This deep-water port was made necessary by the increasing size of container ships but also the silting of the Yangtze, which narrows to less than 20 meters (66 ft) as far out as 45 miles (70 km) from Hengsha.[44]

Downtown Shanghai is bisected by the Huangpu River, a man-made tributary of the Yangtze that was created by order of Lord Chunshen during the Warring States Period. The historic center of the city was located on the west bank of the Huangpu (Puxi), near the mouth of Suzhou Creek, connecting it with Lake Tai and the Grand Canal. The central financial district Lujiazui has grown up on the east bank of the Huangpu (Pudong). The destruction of local wetlands occasioned by the creation of Pudong International Airport along the peninsula's eastern shore has been somewhat offset by the protection and expansion of the nearby shoals of Jiuduansha as a nature preserve.[45]

Shanghai's location on an alluvial plain means that the vast majority of its 6,340.5 km2 (2,448.1 sq mi) land area is flat, with an average elevation of 4 m (13 ft).[4] Its sandy soil has required its skyscrapers to be built with deep concrete piles to stop them from sinking into the soft ground of the central area. The few hills such as She Shan lie to the southwest and the highest point is the peak of Dajinshan Island in Hangzhou Bay (103 m or 338 ft).[4] The city has many rivers, canals, streams and lakes and is known for its rich water resources as part of the Lake Tai drainage area.[3]

Climate[edit]
Shanghai has a humid subtropical climate (K?ppen Cfa) and experiences four distinct seasons. Winters are chilly and damp, with northwesterly winds from Siberia can cause nighttime temperatures to drop below freezing, although most years there are only one or two days of snowfall. Summers are hot and humid, with an average of 8.7 days exceeding 35 C (95 F) annually; occasional downpours or freak thunderstorms can be expected. The city is also susceptible to typhoons in summer and the beginning of autumn, none of which in recent years has caused considerable damage.[46] The most pleasant seasons are spring, although changeable and often rainy, and autumn, which is generally sunny and dry. The city averages 4.2 C (39.6 F) in January and 27.9 C (82.2 F) in July, for an annual mean of 16.1 C (61.0 F). With monthly percent possible sunshine ranging from 34% in March to 54% in August, the city receives 1,895 hours of bright sunshine annually. Extremes since 1951 have ranged from ?10.1 C (14 F) on 31 January 1977 (unofficial record of ?12.1 C (10 F) was set on 19 January 1893) to 39.9 C (104 F) on 6 and 8 August 2013. A highest record of 40.8 C (105 F) was registered in another station on 7 August 2013.[47][48][49][50][51]



Climate data for Shanghai (normals 1991C2010, extremes 1951Cpresent)
Month	Jan	Feb	Mar	Apr	May	Jun	Jul	Aug	Sep	Oct	Nov	Dec	Year
Record high C (F)	22.1
(71.8)	27.0
(80.6)	29.6
(85.3)	34.3
(93.7)	35.5
(95.9)	37.5
(99.5)	39.0
(102.2)	39.9
(103.8)	38.2
(100.8)	34.0
(93.2)	28.7
(83.7)	23.4
(74.1)	39.9
(103.8)
Average high C (F)	8.1
(46.6)	10.1
(50.2)	13.8
(56.8)	19.5
(67.1)	24.8
(76.6)	27.8
(82)	32.2
(90)	31.5
(88.7)	27.9
(82.2)	22.9
(73.2)	17.3
(63.1)	11.1
(52)	20.58
(69.04)
Daily mean C (F)	4.8
(40.6)	6.6
(43.9)	10.0
(50)	15.3
(59.5)	20.7
(69.3)	24.4
(75.9)	28.6
(83.5)	28.3
(82.9)	24.9
(76.8)	19.7
(67.5)	13.7
(56.7)	7.6
(45.7)	17.05
(62.69)
Average low C (F)	2.1
(35.8)	3.7
(38.7)	6.9
(44.4)	11.9
(53.4)	17.3
(63.1)	21.7
(71.1)	25.8
(78.4)	25.8
(78.4)	22.4
(72.3)	16.8
(62.2)	10.6
(51.1)	4.7
(40.5)	14.14
(57.45)
Record low C (F)	?10.1
(13.8)	?7.9
(17.8)	?5.4
(22.3)	?0.5
(31.1)	6.9
(44.4)	12.3
(54.1)	16.3
(61.3)	18.8
(65.8)	10.8
(51.4)	1.7
(35.1)	?4.2
(24.4)	?8.5
(16.7)	?10.1
(13.8)
Average precipitation mm (inches)	74.4
(2.929)	59.1
(2.327)	93.8
(3.693)	74.2
(2.921)	84.5
(3.327)	181.8
(7.157)	145.7
(5.736)	213.7
(8.413)	87.1
(3.429)	55.6
(2.189)	52.3
(2.059)	43.9
(1.728)	1,166.1
(45.908)
Average precipitation days	9.9	9.2	12.4	11.2	10.4	12.7	11.4	12.3	9.1	6.9	7.6	7.7	120.8
Average relative humidity (%)	74	73	73	72	72	79	77	78	75	72	72	71	74
Mean monthly sunshine hours	114.3	119.9	128.5	148.5	169.8	130.9	190.8	185.7	167.5	161.4	131.1	127.4	1,775.8
Source: China Meteorological Administration [52]
Cityscape[edit]

Panoramic view of Puxi's historical buildings from the Bund

Panoramic view of Pudong's skyline from the Bund
Politics[edit]

The government of Shanghai seated on HSBC Building, the Bund from 1955C1995. The historic building, which was headquarter of The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation from 1923 to 1955, now houses Shanghai Pudong Development Bank.
Main article: Politics of Shanghai
Like virtually all governing institutions in the mainland People's Republic of China, the politics of Shanghai is structured in a dual party-government system,[53] in which the Party Committee Secretary, officially termed the Communist Party of China Shanghai Municipal Committee Secretary (currently Han Zheng), outranks the Mayor (currently Yang Xiong).

Political power in Shanghai is widely seen as a stepping stone to higher positions in the national government. Since Jiang Zemin became the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China in June 1989, all but one former Shanghai party secretary was elevated to the Politburo Standing Committee, the de facto highest decision-making body in China,[53] including Jiang himself (Party General Secretary),[54] Zhu Rongji (Premier),[55] Wu Bangguo (Chairman of the National People's Congress),[56] Huang Ju (Vice Premier),[57] Xi Jinping (current General Secretary),[58] and Yu Zhengsheng. Zeng Qinghong, a former deputy party secretray of Shanghai, also rose to the Politburo Standing Committee and became the Vice President and an influential power broker.[59] The only exception is Chen Liangyu, who was fired in 2006 and later convicted of corruption.[60] Officials with ties to the Shanghai administration form a powerful faction in the national government, the so-called Shanghai Clique, which was often thought to compete against the rival Youth League Faction over personnel appointments and policy decisions.[61] Xi Jinping, successor to Hu Jintao as General Secretary and President, was a compromise candidate between the two groups with supporters in both camps.

Administrative divisions[edit]

Map of central Shanghai
Main articles: List of administrative divisions of Shanghai and List of township-level divisions of Shanghai
Shanghai is administratively equal to a province and is divided into 16 county-level districts. Even though every district has its own urban core, the real city center is between Bund to the east, Nanjing Rd to the north, Old City Temple and Huaihai Road to the south. Prominent central business areas include Lujiazui on the east bank of the Huangpu River, and The Bund and Hongqiao areas in the west bank of the Huangpu River. The city hall and major administration units are located in Huangpu District, which also serve as a commercial area, including the famous Nanjing Road. Other major commercial areas include Xintiandi and the classy Huaihai Road (previously Avenue Joffre) in Huangpu District and Xujiahui (formerly Romanized as Zikawei or Siccawei, reflecting the Shanghainese pronunciation) in Xuhui District. Many universities in Shanghai are located in residential areas of Yangpu District and Putuo District.

Seven of the districts govern Puxi (lit. "The West Bank"), the older part of urban Shanghai on the west bank of the Huangpu River. These seven districts are collectively referred to as Shanghai Proper () or the core city (): Huangpu, Xuhui, Changning, Jing'an, Putuo, Hongkou, Yangpu

Pudong (lit. "The East Bank"), the newer part of urban and suburban Shanghai on the east bank of the Huangpu River, is governed by: Pudong New Area (Chuansha County until 1992, merged with Nanhui District in 2009 and with oversight of the Jiuduansha shoals)

Seven of the districts govern suburbs, satellite towns, and rural areas further away from the urban core: Baoshan (Baoshan County until 1988), Minhang (original Minhang District & Shanghai County until 1992), Jiading (Jiading County until 1992), Jinshan (Jinshan County until 1997), Songjiang (Songjiang County until 1998), Qingpu (Qingpu County until 1999), Fengxian (Fengxian County until 2001)

The islands of Changxing and Hengsha and most (but not all[63]) of Chongming Island form: Chongming

The former district of Nanhui was absorbed into Pudong District in 2009. In 2011 Luwan District merged with Huangpu District.

As of 2015, these county-level divisions are further divided into the following 210 township-level divisions: 109 towns, 2 townships, 99 subdistricts. Those are in turn divided into the following village-level divisions: 3,661 neighborhood committees and 1,704 village committees.[64]

Administrative divisions of Shanghai
1 Xuhui Changning 2 Putuo 3 Yangpu Minhang Baoshan Jiading Pudong Jinshan Songjiang Qingpu Fengxian Chongming 1. Huangpu 2. Jing'an 3. Hongkou
Division code[65]	English name	Simp. Chinese	Pinyin	Area in km2[66]	Population 2010[67]	Seat	Postal code	Divisions[68]
Subdistricts	Towns	Townships	Residential communities	Villages
310000	Shanghai Municipality		Shnghi Sh	6340.50	23,019,196	Huangpu District	200000	100	107	2	4024	1610
310101	Huangpu District		Hungp Q	20.46	678,670	Waitan Subdistrict	200000	10			189	
310104	Xuhui District		Xhu Q	54.76	1,085,130	Xujiahui Subdistrict	200000	12	1		306	
310105	Changning District		Chngnng Q	38.30	690,571	Jiangsu Road Subdistrict	200000	9	1		184	
310106	Jing'an District		Jng'n Q	37.37	1,077,284	Jiangning Road Subdistrict	200000	13	1		283	1
310107	Putuo District		Ptu Q	54.83	1,288,881	Zhenru Town Subdistrict	200000	8	2		245	7
310109	Hongkou District		Hngku Q	23.48	852,476	Jiaxing Road Subdistrict	200000	8			226	
310110	Yangpu District		Yngp Q	60.73	1,313,222	Pingliang Road Subdistrict	200000	11	1		307	
310112	Minhang District		Mnhng Q	371.68	2,429,372	Xinzhuang Town	201100	3	9		408	136
310113	Baoshan District		Boshn Q	270.99	1,904,886	Youyi Road Subdistrict	201900	3	9		350	108
310114	Jiading District		Jidng Q	458.80	1,471,231	Xincheng Road Subdistrict	201800	3	7		153	146
310115	Pudong New Area		Pdng Xn Q	1210.41	5,044,430	Huamu Subdistrict	201200 & 201300	12	24		829	371
310116	Jinshan District		Jnshn Q	586.05	732,438	Shanyang Town	201500	1	9		88	124
310117	Songjiang District		Sngjing Q	604.71	1,582,398	Fangsong Subdistrict	201600	4	11		185	86
310118	Qingpu District		Qngp Q	675.54	1,081,022	Xiayang Subdistrict	201700	3	8		97	184
310120	Fengxian District		Fngxin Q	687.39	1,083,463	Nanqiao Town	201400		8		107	177
310121	Chongming District		Chngmng Q	1185.49	703,722	Chengqiao Town	202100		16	2	67	270
Economy[edit]
Main article: Economy of China

Panoramic view of Pudong's skyline in 2010

Increasing influence over global capital market: Shanghai Stock Exchange

Shanghai Port is the world's busiest container port

Lujiazui at night, Pudong
Shanghai is the commercial and financial center of mainland China, and ranks 16th in the 2016 edition of the Global Financial Centres Index published by the Z/Yen Group and Qatar Financial Centre Authority.[69] It was the largest and most prosperous city in East Asia during the 1930s, and rapid re-development began in the 1990s.[16] This is exemplified by the Pudong District, a former swampland reclaimed to serve as a pilot area for integrated economic reforms. By the end of 2009, there were 787 financial institutions, of which 170 were foreign-invested.[70] In 2009, the Shanghai Stock Exchange ranked third among worldwide stock exchanges in terms of trading volume and sixth in terms of the total capitalization of listed companies, and the trading volume of six key commodities including rubber, copper and zinc on the Shanghai Futures Exchange all ranked first in the world.[71] In September 2013, with the backing of Chinese Premier Li Keqiang the city launched the China (Shanghai) Pilot Free-Trade Zone-the first free-trade zone in mainland China. The Zone introduced a number of pilot reforms designed to create a preferential environment for foreign investment. In April 2014, The Banker reported that Shanghai "has attracted the highest volumes of financial sector foreign direct investment in the Asia-Pacific region in the 12 months to the end of January 2014".[72] In August 2014, Shanghai was named FDi magazine's Chinese Province of the Future 2014/15 due to "particularly impressive performances in the Business Friendliness and Connectivity categories, as well as placing second in the Economic Potential and Human Capital and Lifestyle categories".[73]

In the last two decades Shanghai has been one of the fastest developing cities in the world. Since 1992 Shanghai has recorded double-digit growth almost every year except during the global recession of 2008 and 2009.[74] In 2011, Shanghai's total GDP grew to 1.92 trillion yuan (US$297 billion) with GDP per capita of 82,560 yuan (US $12,784).[7] The three largest service industries are financial services, retail, and real estate. The manufacturing and agricultural sectors accounted for 39.9 percent and 0.7 percent of the total output respectively.[70] Average annual disposable income of Shanghai residents, based on the first three quarters of 2009, was 21,871 RMB.[75]

Located at the heart of the Yangtze River Delta, Shanghai has the world's busiest container port, which handled 29.05 million TEUs in 2010.[76] Shanghai aims to be an international shipping center in the near future.[77]

Shanghai is one of the main industrial centers of China, playing a key role in China's heavy industries. A large number of industrial zones, including Shanghai Hongqiao Economic and Technological Development Zone, Jinqiao Export Economic Processing Zone, Minhang Economic and Technological Development Zone, and Shanghai Caohejing High-Tech Development Zone, are backbones of Shanghai's secondary industry. Heavy industries accounted for 78% of the gross industrial output in 2009. China's largest steelmaker Baosteel Group, China's largest shipbuilding base C Hudong-Zhonghua Shipbuilding Group, and the Jiangnan Shipyard, one of China's oldest shipbuilders are all located in Shanghai.[78][79] Auto manufacture is another important industry. The Shanghai-based SAIC Motor is one of the three largest automotive corporations in China, and has strategic partnerships with Volkswagen and General Motors.[80]

The conference and meeting sector is also growing. In 2012, the city hosted 780 international gatherings, up from 754 in 2011. The high supply of hotel rooms has kept room rates lower than expected, with the average room rate for four- and five-star hotels in 2012 at just RMB950 (US$153).[81]

As of September 2013, Shanghai is also home to the largest free-trade zone in mainland China, the China (Shanghai) Pilot Free-Trade Zone. The zone covers an area of 29 km2 and integrates four existing bonded zones  Waigaoqiao Free Trade Zone, Waigaoqiao Free Trade Logistics Park, Yangshan Free Trade Port Area and Pudong Airport Comprehensive Free Trade Zone. Several preferential policies have been implemented to attract foreign investment in various industries to the FTZ. Because the Zone is not technically considered PRC territory for tax purposes, commodities entering the zone are not subject to duty and customs clearance as would otherwise be the case.

Demographics[edit]
Main article: Demographics of Shanghai
Historical population
Year	Pop.	%
1953[82]	6,204,400	    
1964[82]	10,816,500	+74.3%
1982[82]	11,859,700	+9.6%
1990[82]	13,341,900	+12.5%
2000[82]	16,407,700	+23.0%
2010[82]	23,019,200	+40.3%
2012[83]	23,804,300	+3.4%
2013[83]	24,151,500	+1.5%
2014[12]	24,256,800	+0.4%
Population size may be affected by changes to administrative divisions.
The 2010 census put Shanghai's total population at 23,019,148, a growth of 37.53% from 16,737,734 in 2000.[84][85] 20.6 million of the total population, or 89.3%, are urban, and 2.5 million (10.7) are rural.[86] Based on the population of its total administrative area, Shanghai is the second largest of the four direct-controlled municipalities of China, behind Chongqing, but is generally considered the largest Chinese city because Chongqing's urban population is much smaller.[9]

Shanghai also has 150,000 officially registered foreigners, including 31,500 Japanese, 21,000 Americans and 20,700 Koreans. Of course, this is based on official figures, so the real number of foreign citizens in the city is probably much higher.[87]

Religion[edit]





Circle frame.svg
Religion in Shanghai (2012)[88]

  Non religious or traditional faiths (86.9%)
  Buddhism (10.4%)
  Protestantism (1.9%)
  Catholicism (0.7%)
  Others (0.1%)
Due to its cosmopolitan history, Shanghai has a blend of religious heritage as shown by the religious buildings and institutions still scattered around the city. According to a 2012 survey[88] only around 13% of the population of Shanghai belongs to organised religions, the largest groups being Buddhists with 10.4%, followed by Protestants with 1.9%, Catholics with 0.7% and other faiths with 0.1%. Around 87% of the population may be either irreligious or involved in worship of nature deities and ancestors, Confucian churches, Taoism and folk religious sects.

There are folk religious temples such as a Temple of the Chenghuangshen (City God), at the heart of the old city, and a temple dedicated to the Three Kingdoms general Guan Yu. The White Cloud Temple of Shanghai is an important Taoist centre in the city. The Wenmiao (Temple of the God of Culture) is dedicated to Confucius.

Buddhism, in its Chinese varieties, has had a presence in Shanghai since ancient times. The Longhua Temple, the largest temple in Shanghai, and the Jing'an Temple, were first founded in the Three Kingdoms period. Another important temple is the Jade Buddha Temple, which is named after a large statue of Buddha carved out of jade in the temple. In recent decades, dozens of modern temples have been built throughout the city.

Islam came into Shanghai 700 years ago and a mosque was built in 1295 in Songjiang. In 1843, a teachers' college was also set up. The Shanghai Muslim Association is located in the Xiaotaoyuan Mosque in Huangpu.

Shanghai has one of the largest proportions of Catholics in China (2003).[89] Among Catholic churches, St Ignatius Cathedral in Xujiahui is one of the largest, while She Shan Basilica is an active pilgrimage site.

Other forms of Christianity in Shanghai include Eastern Orthodox minorities and, since 1996, registered Christian Protestant churches. During World War II thousands of Jews descended upon Shanghai in an effort to flee Hitler's regime. The Jews lived side-by-side in a designated area called Shanghai Ghetto and formed a vibrant community centered on the Ohel Moishe Synagogue,[90] which is preserved remnant of this portion of Shanghai's complex religious past.[91]

Education[edit]
See also: List of universities and colleges in Shanghai

University City District in Songjiang
Shanghai took the top spot in the 2009 and 2012 Program for International Student Assessment (PISA), a world-wide study of academic performance of 15-year-old students conducted by the OECD. Shanghai students, including migrant children, scored highest in every aspect (math, reading and science) in the world. The study concludes that public-funded schools in Shanghai have the highest educational quality in the world.[92][93] Critics of PISA results counter that in Shanghai and other Chinese cities, most children of migrant workers can only attend city schools up to the ninth grade, and must return to their parents' hometowns for high school due to hukou restrictions, thus skewing the composition of the city's high school students in favor of wealthier local families.[94]


Shanghai Jiao Tong University Library
Shanghai is the first city in the country to implement 9-year mandatory education. The 2010 census shows that out of Shanghai's total population, 22.0% had a college education, double the level from 2000, while 21.0% had high school, 36.5% middle school, and 1.35% primary school education. 2.74% of residents age 15 and older were illiterate.[95]

Shanghai has more than 930 kindergartens, 1,200 primary and 850 middle schools. Over 760,000 middle schools students and 871,000 primary school students are taught by 76,000 and 64,000 teaching staff respectively.[96]

Shanghai is a major center of higher education in China with over 30 universities and colleges. A number of China's most prestigious universities are based in Shanghai, including Fudan University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Tongji University, East China Normal University (these universities are selected as "985 universities" by the Chinese Government in order to build world-class universities). In 2012 NYU Shanghai was established in Pudong by New York University in partnership with East China Normal University as the first Sino-US joint venture university. In 2013 the Shanghai Municipality and the Chinese Academy of Sciences founded the ShanghaiTech University in the Zhangjiang Hi-Tech Park in Pudong. This new research university is aiming to be a first-class institution on a national and international level.[97] The cadre school China Executive Leadership Academy in Pudong is also located in Shanghai.

Children with foreign passports are permitted to attend any public school in Shanghai. Prior to 2007 they were permitted to attend 150 select public schools. In 2006 about 2,000 non-Chinese nationals under 18 years of age attended Shanghai public schools.[98] Students with Hanyu Shuiping Kaoshi (HSK) above 3 or 4 may attend public schools using Mandarin Chinese as the medium of instruction, while students below HSK 3C4 may attend international divisions of public schools or private international schools.[99]

Shanghai has the largest number of international schools of any city in China. In November 2015 Christopher Cottrell of the Global Times wrote that Shanghai "prides itself on its international schools".[100]

Transport[edit]
Public transport[edit]

The Maglev with a top speed of 431 km/h (268 mph) exiting the Shanghai Pudong International Airport
Main article: Public transport in Shanghai
Shanghai has an extensive public transport system, largely based on metros, buses and taxis. Payment of all these public transportation tools can be made by using the Shanghai Public Transportation Card.

Shanghai's rapid transit system, the Shanghai Metro, incorporates both subway and light railway lines and extends to every core urban district as well as neighboring suburban districts.

As of 2014, there are 14 metro lines (excluding the Shanghai Maglev Train and Jinshan Railway), 329 stations and 538 km (334 mi) of tracks in operation, making it the longest network in the world.[101] On 22 October 2010, it set a record of daily ridership of 7.548 million.[102] The fare depends on the length of travel distance starting from 3 RMB.

In 2010, Shanghai returned tram, this time as a modern rubber tyred Translohr system, in Zhangjiang area of East Shanghai as Zhangjiang Tram.

Shanghai also has the world's most extensive network of urban bus routes, with nearly one thousand bus lines, operated by numerous transportation companies.[103] The system includes the world's oldest trolleybus system. Bus fare normally costs 2 RMB.

Taxis are plentiful in Shanghai. The base fare is currently 14 (inclusive of a 1 fuel surcharge; 18 between 11:00 pm and 5:00 am) which covers the first 3 km (2 mi). Additional kilometers cost 2.4 each (3.2 between 11:00 pm and 5:00 am).[104]

Roads[edit]
See also: Expressways of Shanghai
Shanghai is a major hub of China's expressway network. Many national expressways (prefixed with G) pass through or terminate in Shanghai, including G2 BeijingCShanghai Expressway (overlapping G42 ShanghaiCChengdu), G15 ShenyangCHaikou, G40 ShanghaiCXi'an, G50 ShanghaiCChongqing, G60 ShanghaiCKunming (overlapping G92 ShanghaiCNingbo), and G1501 Shanghai Ring Expressway. In addition, there are also numerous municipal expressways prefixed with S (S1, S2, S20, etc.). Shanghai has one bridge-tunnel crossing spanning the mouth of the Yangtze to the north of the city.

In the city center, there are several elevated expressways to lessen traffic pressure on surface streets, but traffic in and around Shanghai is often heavy and traffic jams are commonplace during rush hour. There are bicycle lanes separate from car traffic on many surface streets, but bicycles and motorcycles are banned from most main roads including the elevated expressways.

Private car ownership in Shanghai has been rapidly increasing in recent years, but a new private car cannot be driven until the owner buys a license in the monthly private car license plate auction. Around 11,500 license plates are auctioned each month and the average price is about 84,000 RMB ($12,758). According to the municipal regulation in 2016, only those who are Shanghai registered residents or have paid social insurance or individual incomer tax for over 3 years in a row. The purpose of this policy is to limit the growth of automobile traffic and to alleviate congestion.[105]

Railway[edit]

The lobby of Shanghai South Railway Station
Shanghai has four major railway stations: Shanghai Railway Station, Shanghai South Railway Station, Shanghai West Railway Station, and Shanghai Hongqiao Railway Station. Three are connected to the metro network and serve as hubs in the railway network of China. Two main railways terminate in Shanghai: Jinghu Railway from Beijing, and Huhang Railway from Hangzhou. Hongqiao Station also serves as the main Shanghai terminus of three high-speed rail lines: the ShanghaiCHangzhou High-Speed Railway, the ShanghaiCNanjing High-Speed Railway, and the BeijingCShanghai High-Speed Railway.


Shanghai Pudong International Airport terminal at night
Air[edit]
Shanghai is one of the leading air transport gateways in Asia. The city has two commercial airports: Shanghai Pudong International Airport and Shanghai Hongqiao International Airport.[106] Pudong Airport is the main international airport, while Hongqiao Airport mainly operates domestic flights with limited short-haul international flights. In 2010 the two airports served 71.7 million passengers (Pudong 40.4 million, Hongqiao 31.3 million), and handled 3.7 million tons of cargo (Pudong 3.22 million tons, Hongqiao 480 thousand tons).[107]

Architecture[edit]
See also: Major National Historical and Cultural Sites (Shanghai) and List of tallest buildings in Shanghai

Renovated shikumen lanes in Xintiandi, now a high-end restaurant and shopping center

Paramount, a historical dancehall. Art Deco structure, built 1931C1932.

Shanghai Exhibition Centre, an example of Soviet neoclassical architecture in Shanghai

Site of the First National Congress of the Communist Party of China, a typical shikumen building in the former French Concession.
Shanghai has a rich collection of buildings and structures of various architectural styles. The Bund, located by the bank of the Huangpu River, contains a rich collection of early 20th-century architecture, ranging in style from neoclassical HSBC Building to the art deco Sassoon House. A number of areas in the former foreign concessions are also well-preserved, the most notable ones being the French Concession. Shanghai has one of the world's largest number of Art Deco buildings as a result of the construction boom during the 1920s and 1930s. One of the most famous architects working in Shanghai was Lszl Hudec, a Hungarian-Slovak architect who lived in the city between 1918C1947. Some of his most notable Art Deco buildings include the Park Hotel and the Grand Theater. Other prominent architects who contributed to the Art Deco style are Parker & Palmer, who designed the Peace Hotel, Metropole Hotel, and the Broadway Mansions, and Austrian architect GH Gonda who designed the Capital Theatre. The Bund's first revitalization started in 1986 with a new promenade by the Dutch Architect Paulus Snoeren, the completion was in the mid-1990s.


Shanghai World Financial Center (left) and Jin Mao Tower (right)
In recent years, a large number of architecturally distinctive and even eccentric buildings have sprung up throughout Shanghai. Notable examples of contemporary architecture include the Shanghai Museum, Shanghai Grand Theatre in the People's Square precinct and Shanghai Oriental Art Center. Despite rampant redevelopment, the old city still retains some buildings of a traditional style, such as the Yuyuan Garden, an elaborate traditional garden in the Jiangnan style.

One uniquely Shanghainese cultural element is the shikumen () residences, which are two- or three-story townhouses, with the front yard protected by a high brick wall. Each residence is connected and arranged in straight alleys, known as a longtang (), pronounced longdang in Shanghainese. The entrance to each alley is usually surmounted by a stylistic stone arch. The whole resembles terrace houses or townhouses commonly seen in Anglo-American countries, but distinguished by the tall, heavy brick wall in front of each house. The name "shikumen" means "stone storage door", referring to the strong gateway to each house.

The shikumen is a cultural blend of elements found in Western architecture with traditional Lower Yangtze (Jiangnan) Chinese architecture and social behavior. All traditional Chinese dwellings had a courtyard, and the shikumen was no exception. Yet, to compromise with its urban nature, it was much smaller and provided an "interior haven" to the commotions in the streets, allowing for raindrops to fall and vegetation to grow freely within a residence. The courtyard also allowed sunlight and adequate ventilation into the rooms.

Less than Beijing, the city also has some examples of Soviet neoclassical architecture or Stalinist architecture. These buildings were mostly erected during the period from the founding of the People's Republic in 1949 until the Sino-Soviet Split in the late 1960s. During this decade, large numbers of Soviet experts, including architects, poured into China to aid the country in the construction of a communist state. Examples of Soviet neoclassical architecture in Shanghai include what is today the Shanghai Exhibition Centre.

The Pudong district of Shanghai is home to a number of skyscrapers, many of which rank among the tallest in the world. Among the most prominent examples are the Jin Mao Tower and the taller Shanghai World Financial Center, which at 492 metres (1,614 ft) tall is the third tallest skyscraper in mainland China and ranks tenth in the world. The Shanghai Tower, completed in 2015, is the tallest building in China, as well as the second tallest in the world.[108] With a height of 632 metres (2,073 ft), the building has 128 floors and a total floor area of 380,000 square metres (4,100,000 sq ft) above ground.[109] The distinctive Oriental Pearl Tower, at 468 metres (1,535 ft), is located nearby, as is One Lujiazui, standing at 269 metres (883 ft).[110]

Environment[edit]
Parks and resorts[edit]

People's Square seen from Urban Planning Exhibition Center

Enchanted Storybook Castle of Shanghai Disneyland
The extensive public park system in Shanghai offers the citizens some reprieve from the urban jungle. By the year 2012, the city had 157 parks, with 138 of them free of charge.[111] Some of the parks, aside from offering a green public space to locals, became popular tourist attractions due to their unique location, history or architecture. The former racetrack turned central park, People's Square park, located in the heart of downtown Shanghai, is especially well known for its proximity to other major landmarks in the city. Fuxing Park, located in the former French Concession of Shanghai, features formal French-style gardens and is surrounded by high end bars and cafes. Zhongshan Park in northwestern central Shanghai is famous for its monument of Chopin, the tallest statue dedicated to the composer in the world. Built in 1914 as Jessfield Park, it once contained the campus of St. John's University, Shanghai's first international college; today, it is known for its extensive rose and peony gardens, a large children's play area, and as the location of an important transfer station on the city's metro system. Shanghai Botanical Garden is located 12 km (7 mi) southwest of the city center and was established in 1978. One of the newest parks is in the Xujiahui area C Xujiahui Park, built in 1999 on the former grounds of the Great Chinese Rubber Works Factory and the EMI Recording Studio (now La Villa Rouge restaurant). The park has a man-made lake with a sky bridge running across the park, and offers a pleasant respite for Xujiahui shoppers. Other well-known Shanghai parks include: People's Square Park, Gongqing Forest Park, Fuxing Park, Zhongshan Park, Lu Xun Park, Century Park, and Jing'an Park.

The Shanghai Disney Resort Project was approved by the government on 4 November 2009.[112] It is currently under construction. The resort is planned to be operational by 2016.[113] A $4.4 billion theme park and resort in Pudong will have a castle that will be the biggest among Disney's resorts.[114]

Environmental protection[edit]
Public awareness of the environment is growing, and the city is investing in a number of environmental protection projects. A 10-year, US$1 billion cleanup of Suzhou Creek, which runs through the city-center, was expected to be finished in 2008,[115] and the government also provides incentives for transportation companies to invest in LPG buses and taxis. Additionally, the government has moved almost all the factories within the city center to either the outskirts or other provinces in the recent decades.[116]

Air pollution and government reaction[edit]

Huangpu District during the 2013 Eastern China smog
Air pollution in Shanghai is low compared to other Chinese cities, but still substantial by world standards.[117] During the December 2013 Eastern China smog, air pollution rates reached between 23 and 31 times the international standard.[118][119] On 6 December 2013, levels of PM2.5 particulate matter in Shanghai rose above 600 micrograms per cubic meter and in the surrounding area, above 700 micrograms per cubic metre.[119] Levels of PM2.5 in Putuo District reached 726 micrograms per cubic meter.[120][121] As a result, the Shanghai Municipal Education Commission received orders to suspend students' outdoor activities. Authorities pulled nearly one-third of government vehicles from the roads, while a mass of construction work was halted. Most of inbound flights were cancelled, and more than 50 flights were diverted at Pudong International Airport.[122]

On 23 January 2014, Yang Xiong, the mayor of Shanghai municipality announced that three main measures would be taken to manage the air pollution in Shanghai, along with surrounding Anhui, Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces.[123] The measures involved delivery of the 2013 air cleaning program, linkage mechanism with the three surrounding provinces and improvement of the ability of early warning of emergency situation.[123] On 12 February 2014, China's cabinet announced that a 10-billion-renminbi (US$1.7-billion) fund will be set up to help companies to meet new environmental standards.[124]

Culture[edit]

Shanghai still contains some picturesque historic rural suburban areas.

The Mercedes-Benz Arena, previously known as the Expo Cultural Center during the world expo in 2010.
Because of Shanghai's status as the cultural and economic center of East Asia for the first half of the twentieth century, it is popularly seen as the birthplace of everything considered modern in China. It was in Shanghai, for example, that the first motor car was driven and (technically) the first train tracks and modern sewers were laid. It was also the intellectual battleground between socialist writers who concentrated on critical realism, which was pioneered by Lu Xun, Mao Dun, Nien Cheng and the famous French novel by Andr Malraux, Man's Fate, and the more "bourgeois", more romantic and aesthetically inclined writers, such as Shi Zhecun, Shao Xunmei, Ye Lingfeng, and Eileen Chang.

In the past 5 years Shanghai has been widely recognized as a new influence and inspiration for cyberpunk culture.[125] Futuristic buildings such as the Oriental Pearl Tower and the neon-illuminated Yan'an Elevated Road are a few examples that have helped to boost Shanghai's cyberpunk image.

Language[edit]
The vernacular language spoken in the city is Shanghainese, a dialect of Wu language. While the official language nationwide is Standard Mandarin, itself mutually unintelligible with Wu Chinese. Most Shanghai residents are the descendants of immigrants from the two adjacent provinces of Jiangsu and Zhejiang who moved to Shanghai in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The population of those regions speak different dialects of Wu Chinese. From the 1990s, many migrants outside of Wu-speaking area have come to Shanghai for work. They often cannot speak the local language and therefore use Mandarin as a lingua franca.

Modern Shanghainese is based on different dialects of Wu: the Suzhou dialect, the Ningbo dialect, and dialects of Shanghai's traditional areas (now lie within the Hongkou, Baoshan and Pudong districts). The prestige dialect of Wu Chinese is spoken within the Chinese city of Shanghai prior to its modern expansion. Known as "the local tongue" (), it is influenced to a lesser extent by the languages of other nearby regions from which large numbers of people have migrated to Shanghai since the 20th century, and includes a significant number of terms borrowed from European languages. The prevalence of Mandarin fluency is generally higher for those born after 1949 than those born before, while the prevalence of English fluency is higher for people who received their secondary and tertiary education before 1949 than those who did so after 1949 and before the 1990s.

Museums[edit]

The Shanghai Museum, located on the People's Square
Shanghai boasts several museums[126] of regional and national importance. The Shanghai Museum has one of the best collections of Chinese historical artifacts in the world, including a large collection of ancient Chinese bronzes. The China Art Museum, located in the former China Pavilion of Expo 2010, is the largest art museum in Asia. Power Station of Art is built in a converted power station, similar to London's Tate Modern. The Shanghai Natural History Museum and the Shanghai Science and Technology Museum are major natural history and science museums. In addition, there is a variety of smaller, specialist museums housed in important archaeological and historical sites such as the Songze Museum, the Museum of the First National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party, the site of the Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea, the former Ohel Moshe Synagogue (Shanghai Jewish Refugees Museum), and the General Post Office Building (Shanghai Postal Museum). The Rockbund Art Museum is also in Shanghai. There are also many art galleries, concentrated in the M50 Art District and Tianzifang.

Cinema[edit]
Shanghai was the birthplace of Chinese cinema[127] and theater. China's first short film, The Difficult Couple (1913), and the country's first fictional feature film, An Orphan Rescues His Grandfather (, Gu'er Jiu Zuji, 1923) were both produced in Shanghai. These two films were very influential, and established Shanghai as the center of Chinese film-making. Shanghai's film industry went on to blossom during the early 1930s, generating great stars such as Hu Die, Ruan Lingyu, Zhou Xuan, Jin Yan, and Zhao Dan. Another film star, Jiang Qing, went on to become Madame Mao Zedong. The exile of Shanghainese filmmakers and actors as a result of the Second Sino-Japanese War and the Communist revolution contributed enormously to the development of the Hong Kong film industry. Many aspects of Shanghainese popular culture ("Shanghainese Pops") were transferred to Hong Kong by the numerous Shanghainese emigrants and refugees after the Communist Revolution. The movie In the Mood for Love, which was directed by Wong Kar-wai (a native Shanghainese himself), depicts a slice of the displaced Shanghainese community in Hong Kong[128] and the nostalgia for that era, featuring 1940s music by Zhou Xuan.

Arts[edit]

 (No. 4 of a Hundred Thousand Scenes) by Ren Xiong, a pioneer of the Shanghai School of Chinese art, c. 1850.
The "Shanghai School" was an important Chinese school of traditional arts during the Qing Dynasty and the twentieth century. Under the masters from this school, traditional Chinese art developed into the modern style of "Chinese painting".[citation needed] The Shanghai School challenged and broke the elitist tradition of Chinese art,[129] while also paying technical homage to the ancient masters and improving on existing traditional techniques. Members of this school were themselves educated literati who had come to question their very status and the purpose of art and had anticipated the impending modernization of Chinese society. In an era of rapid social change, works from the Shanghai School were widely innovative and diverse and often contained thoughtful yet subtle social commentary. The best known figures from this school include Qi Baishi, Ren Xiong, Ren Bonian, Zhao Zhiqian, Wu Changshuo, Sha Menghai, Pan Tianshou, Fu Baoshi, Xie Zhiliu, He Tianjian, and Wang Zhen. In literature, the term was used in the 1930s by some May Fourth Movement intellectuals C notably Zhou Zuoren and Shen Congwen C as a derogatory label for the literature produced in Shanghai at the time. They argued that Shanghai School literature was merely commercial and therefore did not advance social progress. This became known as the Jingpai versus Haipai (Beijing v. Shanghai School) debate.[130]

The "Songjiang School" () was a small painting school during the Ming Dynasty. It is commonly considered as a further development of the Wu or Wumen School in the then-cultural center of the region, Suzhou. The Huating School () was another important art school during the middle to late Ming Dynasty. Its main achievements were in traditional Chinese painting, calligraphy, and poetry. It was especially famous for its Renwen painting (). Dong Qichang was one of the masters from this school.

Fashion[edit]

Two women wear Shanghai-styled qipao while playing golf in this 1930s Shanghai soap advertisement.
Other Shanghainese cultural artifacts include the cheongsam (Shanghainese: zansae), a modernization of the traditional Manchurian qipao. This contrasts sharply with the traditional qipao, which was designed to conceal the figure and be worn regardless of age. The cheongsam went along well with the western overcoat and the scarf, and portrayed a unique East Asian modernity, epitomizing the Shanghainese population in general. As Western fashions changed, the basic cheongsam design changed, too, introducing high-neck sleeveless dresses, bell-like sleeves, and the black lace frothing at the hem of a ball gown. By the 1940s, cheongsams came in transparent black, beaded bodices, matching capes and even velvet. Later, checked fabrics became also quite common. The 1949 Communist Revolution ended the cheongsam and other fashions in Shanghai. However, the Shanghainese styles have seen a recent revival as stylish party dresses. The fashion industry has been rapidly revitalizing in the past decade. Like Shanghai's architecture, local fashion designers strive to create a fusion of western and traditional designs, often with innovative if controversial results.

In recent times Shanghai has established its own fashion week called Shanghai Fashion Week. It is held twice every year in October and April. The April session is a part of Shanghai International Fashion Culture Festival which usually lasts for a month, while Shanghai Fashion Week lasts for seven days, and the main venue is in Fuxing Park, Shanghai,while the opening and closing ceremony is in Shanghai Fashion Center.[131] Supported by the People's Republic Ministry of Commerce, Shanghai Fashion Week is a major business and culture event of national significance hosted by the Shanghai Municipal Government. Shanghai Fashion Week is aiming to build up an international and professional platform, gathering all of the top design talents of Asia. The event features international designers but the primary purpose is to showcase Chinese designers.[132] The international presence has included many of the most promising young British fashion designers.[133]

Media[edit]
In regard to foreign publications in Shanghai, Hartmut Walravens of the IFLA Newspapers Section said that when the Japanese controlled Shanghai in the 1940s "it was very difficult to publish good papers C one either had to concentrate on emigration problems, or cooperate like the Chronicle".[134]

Newspapers include:

Jiefang Daily
Oriental Sports Daily
Shanghai Daily
Shanghai Star
Xinmin Evening News
Wen Hui Bao
Wenhui Book Review
Newspapers formerly published in Shanghai include:

Der Ostasiatische Lloyd (German)
Gelbe Post
North China Daily News
Shanghai Evening Post & Mercury
Shanghai Gazette
Shanghai Jewish Chronicle
Shanghai Herald
Shanghai Mercury
The Shanghai Post (German paper)
Shanghai Times
Shen Bao (Shanghai News)
Broadcasters:

Shanghai Media Group
Sports[edit]

F1 Chinese Grand Prix in Shanghai

Shanghai Masters in Qizhong Stadium
Shanghai is home to several football teams, including two in the Chinese Super League C Shanghai Shenhua and Shanghai SIPG. Another professional team, Shanghai Shenxin, is currently in China League One. China's top tier The Shanghai Sharks of the Chinese Basketball Association developed Yao Ming before he entered the NBA. Shanghai also has an ice hockey team, China Dragon, and a baseball team, the Shanghai Golden Eagles, which plays in the China Baseball League.


Yao Ming
Shanghai is the hometown of many outstanding and well-known Chinese professional athletes, such as Yao Ming, the 110-meter hurdler Liu Xiang, the table-tennis player Wang Liqin and the former world women's single champion and current Olympic silver medalist badminton player Wang Yihan.

Beginning in 2004, Shanghai started hosting the Chinese Grand Prix, one round of the Formula One World Championship. The race was staged at the Shanghai International Circuit. In 2010, Shanghai also became the host city of German Touring Car Masters (DTM), which raced in a street circuit in Pudong.

Shanghai also holds the Shanghai Masters tennis tournament which is part of ATP World Tour Masters 1000, and the BMW Masters and WGC-HSBC Champions golf tournaments.[135]

The Shanghai Cricket Club is a cricket club based in Shanghai. The club dates back to 1858 when the first recorded cricket match was played between a team of British Naval officers and a Shanghai 11. Following a 45-year dormancy after the founding of the China in 1949, the club was re-established in 1994 by expatriates living in the city and has since grown to over 300 members. The Shanghai cricket team was a cricket team that played various international matches between 1866 and 1948. With cricket in the rest of China almost non-existent, for that period they were the de facto Chinese national side.

International relations[edit]
See also: List of twin towns and sister cities in China
Shanghai is twinned with:[136]
See also[edit]
List of attractions in Shanghai
List of cities with most skyscrapers
List of economic and technological development zones in Shanghai
List of fiction set in Shanghai
List of films set in Shanghai
List of universities and colleges in Shanghai
Shanghai cuisine
iconGeography portal iconAsia portal iconChina portal Shanghai portal
References[edit]
^ "Doing Business in China C Survey". Ministry Of Commerce C People's Republic Of China. Retrieved 5 August 2013.
^ "Land Area". Basic Facts. Shanghai Municipal People's Government. Retrieved 19 July 2011.
^ a b "Water Resources". Basic Facts. Shanghai Municipal People's Government. Retrieved 19 July 2011.
^ a b c "Topographic Features". Basic Facts. Shanghai Municipal People's Government. Retrieved 19 July 2011.
^ 2015 [Shanghai Economic and Social Development Statistical Bulletin 2015] (in Chinese). Shanghai Bureau of Statistics. 2016-03-01. Retrieved 2016-03-04.
^ OECD Urban Policy Reviews: China 2015. OECD. 18 Apr 2015. p. 37. doi:10.1787/9789264230040-en. ISBN 9789264230033.
^ a b "GDP". Dongfang Daily (in Chinese). 20 January 2012. Archived from the original on 23 January 2012.
^ 2013 (PDF) (in Chinese). United Nations Development Programme China. 2013. Retrieved 5 January 2014.
^ a b Chan, Kam Wing (2007). "Misconceptions and Complexities in the Study of China's Cities: Definitions, Statistics, and Implications" (PDF). Eurasian Geography and Economics 48 (4): 383C412. doi:10.2747/1538-7216.48.4.383. Retrieved 13 September 2011., p. 395.
^ "What are China's largest and richest cities?". University of Southern California.
^ "Cities: largest (without surrounding suburban areas)". Geohive. Retrieved 13 September 2011.
^ a b 2014 [Shanghai Economic and Social Development Statistical Bulletin 2014] (in Chinese). Shanghai Bureau of Statistics. 2015-02-28. Retrieved 2015-05-01.
^ "The Competitive Position of London as a Global Financial Centre" (PDF).
^ "Top 50 World Container Ports".
^ "Geographic Location". Basic Facts. Shanghai Municipal People's Government. Retrieved 14 September 2011.
^ a b Scott Tong (October 2009). "Shanghai: Global financial center? Aspirations and reality, and implications for Hong Kong" (PDF). Hong Kong Journal. Retrieved 17 October 2011.
^ "Historic Transformation". Shanghai.gov.cn. 27 May 1949. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
^ Hunt, Katie (21 May 2008). "Shanghai: China's capitalist showpiece". BBC News. Retrieved 7 August 2008.
^ "Of Shanghai... and Suzhou". The Hindu Business Line. 27 January 2003. Archived from the original on 23 May 2009. Retrieved 20 March 2008.
^ a b Danielson, Eric N., Shanghai and the Yangzi Delta, 2004, pp.8C9.
^ Traditional Chinese: ; Shanghainese: Vu2.
^ a b c Shanghai Municipal Government. """,""" ("Origins of Shen and Hu"). (Chinese)
^ Traditional Chinese: ^.
^ Moraski, Brittney (20 July 2011). "Shanghai brings a touch of home". Daily Press. Retrieved 29 July 2011.
^ "Shanghai: Pearl of the Orient". Meetingsfocus.com. 7 April 2013. Retrieved 4 July 2013.
^ a b "Ancient History". cultural-china.com. Retrieved 26 April 2014.
^ Danielson, Eric N., Shanghai and the Yangzi Delta, 2004, p.9.
^ Danielson, Eric N., Shanghai and the Yangzi Delta, 2004, p.9, pp.11C12, p.34.
^ a b Danielson, Eric N., Shanghai and the Yangzi Delta, 2004, p.10.
^ Danielson, Eric N., Shanghai and the Yangtze Delta, 2004, pp.10C11.
^ "The Opium war (or how Hong Kong began)". South China Morning Post.
^ Scarne, John. Twelve years in China. Edinburgh: Constable, 1860: 187C209.
^ Williams, S. Wells. The Middle Kingdom: A Survey of the Geography, Government, Literature, Social Life, Arts, and History of the Chinese Empire and its Inhabitants, Vol. 1, p. 107. Scribner (New York), 1904.
^ Shanghai: Paradise for adventurers. CBC C TV. Legendary Sin Cities. Archived 1 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "All About Shanghai. Chapter 4 C Population". Tales of Old Shanghai.
^ "Shanghai Sanctuary". TIME. 31 July 2008.
^ Gordon Cumming, C. F. (Constance Frederica), "The inventor of the numeral-type for China by the use of which illiterate Chinese both blind and sighted can very quickly be taught to read and write fluently", London : Downey, 1899, archive.org
^ Danielson, Eric N., Shanghai and the Yangzi Delta, 2004, p.34.
^ 149 comfort women houses discovered in Shanghai, Xinhua, 16 June 2005.
^ Changhai est tomb sans combat, Le Monde, 27 May 1949.
^ Shanghai: transformation and modernization under China's open policy. By Yue-man Yeung, Sung Yun-wing, page 66, Chinese University Press, 1996
^ The Party: The Secret World of China Communist rulers
^ "Chongming Island" in the Encyclopedia of Shanghai, p. 52. Shanghai Scientific & Technical Publishers (Shanghai), 2010. Hosted by the Municipality of Shanghai.
^ Wijnolst, N. & al. Malacca-Max (2): Container Shipping Network Economy, p. 115. DUP Satellite, 2000. ISBN 9040721246.
^ "Fourth Island Wetland Emerging", pp. 1C2. Shanghai Daily. 8 December 2009. Hosted at China.org.
^ Spencer, Richard (19 September 2007). "1.6m flee Shanghai typhoon". The Daily Telegraph (UK). Retrieved 20 March 2008.
^ http://cdc.cma.gov.cn/dataSetLogger.do?changeFlag=dataLogger
^ "40.8 ""40". . Retrieved 7 August 2013.
^ Jiang Yabin (6 August 2013). "Temperature matches all-time record high". Global Times. Retrieved 6 August 2013.
^  _ (in Chinese). Sina Shanghai. 27 July 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013.
^ "Extreme Temperatures Around the World". Retrieved 1 December 2010.
^ "" (in Chinese). China Meteorological Administration. Retrieved 2014-06-11.
^ a b Martin, Michael. "Understanding China's Political System" (PDF). Congressional Research Service. Retrieved 13 September 2011.
^ "Profile: Jiang Zemin". BBC News. 19 September 2004. Retrieved 13 September 2011.
^ Kahn, Joseph (19 March 2003). "The Former Premier Who Ended China's 'Splendid Isolation'". New York Times. Retrieved 13 September 2011.
^ "Biography of Wu Bangguo". China Vitae.
^ Yardley, Jim (2 June 2007). "Huang Ju, Powerful Chinese Official, Dies at 68". New York Times. Retrieved 13 September 2011.
^ Cha, Victor. "Xi Jinping". New York Times. Retrieved 13 September 2011.
^ Kahn, Joseph (4 October 2006). "In Graft Inquiry, Chinese See a Shake-Up Coming". New York Times. Retrieved 13 September 2011.
^ "Former Shanghai Party chief gets 18-year term for bribery". Xinhua. 11 April 2008. Retrieved 13 September 2011.
^ Plafker, Ted (25 February 2010). "Factions Help Drive Modern China History". New York Times. Retrieved 13 September 2011.
^ Office of Shanghai Chronicles.  ["Do, Sh", "Islands and Shoals"]. Shanghai Municipal Government (Shanghai), 2015. Accessed 12 January 2015. (Chinese)
^ The absorption of the separate island of Yonglongsha by Chongming in the 1970s has produced a narrow pene-enclave of Jiangsu along about 20 kilometers (12 mi) of the northern shore of the island, separately administered as Nantong's Haiyong and Qilong townships.[62]
^ Shanghai Statistical Yearbook 2010. Retrieved 18 July 2011
^ 
^ 2011
^ shi, Guo wu yuan ren kou pu cha ban gong; council, Guo jia tong ji ju ren kou he jiu ye tong ji si bian = Tabulation on the 2010 population census of the people's republic of China by township / compiled by Population census office under the state; population, Department of; statistics, employment statistics national bureau of (2012). Zhongguo 2010 nian ren kou pu cha fen xiang, zhen, jie dao zi liao (Di 1 ban. ed.). Beijing Shi: Zhongguo tong ji chu ban she. ISBN 978-7-5037-6660-2.
^ 2012
^ "The Global Financial Centres Index 19". Long Finance. March 2016.
^ a b "Shanghai Municipality". hktdc.com. 15 December 2010. Retrieved 17 May 2011.
^ "The rise of Lujiazui Financial City in Shanghai". CCTV News C CNTV English. 19 January 2011. Retrieved 17 May 2011.
^ "Shanghai top for FDI into Asia-Pacific". The Banker. 1 April 2014. Retrieved 11 April 2014.
^ "Chinese Provinces of the Future 2014/15". FDi magazine. 11 August 2014. Retrieved 17 September 2014.
^ "Growth rate of major national economic indicators over preceding year (19782010)". Stats-sh.gov.cn. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
^ "Average income hits 21,871 yuan". Shanghai Daily.
^ "Shanghai overtakes S'pore as world's busiest port". Straits Times. 8 January 2011. Retrieved 14 September 2011.
^ "Shanghai aims at int'l financial and shipping center". China Daily. 26 March 2009. Retrieved 17 May 2011.
^ "Shipping industry woes". China Daily. 30 November 2009. Retrieved 17 May 2011.
^ "China's Largest Shipbuilding Industry Based in Shanghai". People's Daily. 10 April 2001. Retrieved 15 January 2014.
^ "|". Saicgroup. 18 August 2009. Retrieved 17 May 2011.
^ "Shanghai's many challenges". TTGmice. Retrieved 15 April 2013.
^ a b c d e f "Basic Statistics on National Population Census". Shanghai Bureau of Statistics.
^ a b "MAJOR SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC INDICATORS IN MAIN YEARS". Shanghai Statistical Yearbook 2014. Statistics Bureau of Shanghai. Retrieved 2015-05-01.
^ "Communiqu of the National Bureau of Statistics of People's Republic of China on Major Figures of the 2010 Population Census". National Bureau of Statistics of China.
^ "Shanghai 2010 Census Data". Eastday.com.
^ "". Shanghai Statistics Bureau of Statistics. 23 September 2011.
^ "Shanghai Population 2015 C World Population Review". worldpopulationreview.com. Retrieved 2015-11-23.
^ a b Chinese Family Panel Studies 2012: CFPS2012. p. 013
^ According to Johnstone, Patrick; Schirrmacher, Thomas (2003). Gebet fr die Welt. H?nssler. ISBN 978-0-8133-4275-7.
^ "Jewish Refugees Museum : Ohel Moishe Synagogue Shanghai". Visions of Travel.
^ "Shanghai-jews.com". Shanghai-jews.com. Retrieved 17 May 2011.
^ Dillon, Sam (7 December 2010). "In PISA Test, Top Scores From Shanghai Stun Experts". New York Times. Retrieved 17 May 2011.
^ "How China is winning the school race". BBC. 11 October 2011.
^ Helen Gao, "Shanghai Test Scores and the Mystery of the Missing Children", New York Times, January 23, 2014. For Schleicher's response to these criticisms see his post, "Are the Chinese Cheating in PISA Or Are We Cheating Ourselves?" on the OECD's website blog, Education Today, December 10, 2013.
^ "Shanghai sixth national census in 2010 Communiqu on Major Data, Chinese: 2010". Shanghai Municipal Statistics Bureau. 3 May 2011. Retrieved 16 August 2011.
^ "General Aspects of Shanghai Education". Seaie.org. Retrieved 17 May 2011.
^ Rouhi, Maureen. "ShanghaiTech Aims To Raise The Bar For Higher Education In China." Chemical & Engineering News. January 19, 2015. Retrieved on November 19, 2015
^ "Neighborhood Schools Open to Foreign Kids " (Archive). Shanghai Daily at China.org.cn. December 9, 2006. Retrieved on July 16, 2015.
^ Lau, Jessie. "Shanghai international schools are priced beyond the reach of many expats" (print title: "International schools out of reach for many"). South China Morning Post. Sunday 13 September 2015. Retrieved on 14 September 2015.
^ Cottrell, Christopher. "Elitist international schools biased against local hires ." Global Times. November 8, 2015. Retrieved on November 10, 2015.
^ David Barboza (29 April 2010). "Expo Offers Shanghai a New Turn in the Spotlight". The New York Times. Retrieved 29 April 2010.
^ 1022754.8 Shanghai Metro official website. Retrieved 23 October 2010.
^ "Personal Cars and China (2003)".
^ "Shanghai's taxi fares up 2 yuan from today". Shanghaidaily.com. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
^ "Shanghai number plates worth more than a car". Europe.chinadaily.com.cn. Retrieved 17 May 2011.
^ "Transportation". Shanghai Focus. Retrieved 5 May 2010.
^ "Shanghai Pudong". English.pudong.gov.cn. Retrieved 17 May 2011.
^ Alfred Joyner. "Shanghai Tower: Asia's new tallest skyscraper presents a future vision of 'vertical cities'". International Business Times UK.
^ Knight Frank China Knight Frank China Research, Shanghai Office Quarterly Report, Q1 2010
^ Emporis GmbH. "One Lujiazui, Shanghai". Emporis.com. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
^ [1]
^ "The Walt Disney Company Reaches Another Major Milestone on Shanghai Theme Park Project". Walt Disney Company. 3 November 2009.
^ "Disneyland Shanghai to open 2016". The Independent. 8 April 2011. Retrieved 16 December 2011.
^ Barboza, David; Barnes, Brooks (7 April 2011). "Disney to Open Park in Shanghai". The New York Times.
^ "Suzhou Creek clean-up on track". People's Daily Online. 7 December 2006. Retrieved 11 May 2008.
^ "Environmental Protection in China's Wealthiest City". The American Embassy in China. July 2001. Archived from the original on 30 October 2007. Retrieved 11 May 2008.
^ "Shanghai Warns Children to Stay Indoors on Haze, PM2.5 Surge". Bloomberg News. 25 December 2013. Retrieved 25 December 2013.
^ Reuters Editorial (6 December 2013). "Flights delayed as air pollution hits record in Shanghai". Reuters.
^ a b Liu Chen-yao. "  (Smog levels in China reach record levels since the end of 2013; surrounding areas severely polluted" (in Chinese). China news agency.
^ "PM2.5600 ". .
^ "". -.
^ "Shanghai grinds to a halt as smog nears top of air pollution scale". South China Morning Post. 7 December 2013. Retrieved 24 March 2014.
^ a b . " (Three main measures will be taken against Shanghai's air pollution" (in Chinese). www.cnstock.com.
^ Qiu, Jane. Fight against smog ramps up (Nature, 18 February 2014).
^ Sahr Johnny, "Cybercity C Sahr Johnny's Shanghai Dream" That's Shanghai, October 2005; quoted online by [2].
^ "Museums in Shanghai". www.shanghaitourmap.com. Retrieved 2013-10-19.
^ http://www.timeoutshanghai.com/venue/Around_Town-Museums-_Books__Films-Cinemas/12827/Shanghai-Film-Museum.html
^ "Setting His Tale Of Love Found In a City Long Lost". The New York Times. 28 January 2001.
^ "Chinese Art Galleries".
^ Reference about Shanghai Literature for Jingpai vs HaiPai
^ http://www.shanghaifashionweek.com/gg/2010sfw.htm/. Retrieved 18 November 2011. Missing or empty |title= (help)[dead link]
^ "Photos of Shanghai Fashion Week C Scene Asia C Scene Asia C WSJ". The Wall Street Journal. 21 October 2010. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
^ Leisa Barnett (27 October 2008). "Aminaka Wilmont to show in Shanghai (Vogue.com UK)". Vogue.co.uk. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
^ Walravens, Hartmut (2003). "German Influence on the Press in China". Newspapers in International Librarianship: Papers presented by the Newspapers at IFLA General Conferences. Walter de Gruyter. p. 95. ISBN 978-3-11-096279-6.
^ "European Tour, CGA unveil BMW Masters". China Daily. 25 April 2012. Retrieved 26 April 2012.
^ "Shanghai Foreign Affairs". Shfao.gov.cn. Retrieved 17 May 2011.
^ "Partnersk msta HMP" [Prague C Twin Cities HMP]. Portl "Zahrani?n vztahy" [Portal "Foreign Affairs"] (in Czech). 18 July 2013. Archived from the original on 25 June 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2013.
^ "Town Twinning Agreements". Municipalidad de Rosario C Buenos Aires 711. Retrieved 14 October 2014.
^ Mulcahy, Noreen. "Cork C International Relations". Cork City Council. Archived from the original on 18 May 2013. Retrieved 28 August 2013.
^ "Sanghaj is Budapest testvrvrosa lett". Origo.hu. Retrieved 29 August 2013.
^ "Shanghai, Sofia sign intent agreement to become sister cities". Retrieved 27 January 2015.
Further reading[edit]
Danielson, Eric N. (2010). Discover Shanghai. Singapore: Marshall Cavendish.
Danielson, Eric N. (2004). Shanghai and the Yangzi Delta. Singapore: Marshall Cavendish/Times Editions. ISBN 981-232-597-2.
Elvin, Mark (1977). "Market Towns and Waterways: The County of Shang-hai from 1480 to 1910". In Skinner, G. William. The City in Late Imperial China. Stanford, Cal.: Stanford University Press. pp. 441C474. ISBN 978-0-8047-0892-0. OCLC 2883862.
Erh, Deke; Johnston, Tess (2007). Shanghai Art Deco. Hong Kong: Old China Hand Press.
Haarmann, Anke. Shanghai (Urban Public) Space (Berlin: Jovis, 2009). 192 pp. online review
Horesh, Niv (2009). Shanghai's Bund and Beyond. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Johnson, Linda Cooke (1995). Shanghai: From Market Town to Treaty Port. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Johnson, Linda Cooke (1993). Cities of Jiangnan in Late Imperial China. Albany: State University of New York (SUNY). ISBN 0-7914-1424-8.
Scheen, Lena (2015). Shanghai Literary Imaginings: A City in Transformation. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press. ISBN 978-90-8964-587-6.
External links[edit]
Find more about
Shanghai
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Search Wiktionary	Definitions from Wiktionary
Search Commons	Media from Commons
Search Wikinews	News from Wikinews
Search Wikisource	Texts from Wikisource
Search Wikibooks	Textbooks from Wikibooks
Search Wikivoyage	Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Search Wikiversity	Learning resources from Wikiversity
Search Wikidata	Data from Wikidata
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Category:Shanghai.
Official Website
Shanghai at DMOZ
WikiSatellite view of Shanghai at WikiMapia
 Geographic data related to Shanghai at OpenStreetMap
 
Articles related to Shanghai
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 159059201 GND: 4052066-3 NDL: 00637341
Categories: ShanghaiEast ChinaIndependent citiesMetropolitan areas of ChinaPort cities and towns in ChinaNational Famous Historical and Cultural Cities in ChinaNational Garden Cities in ChinaPopulated coastal places in ChinaPopulated places established in the 10th centuryTreaty of NankingYangtze River Delta10th-century establishments in China
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search
SearchGo
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikinews
Wikiquote
Wikivoyage
Languages
Ach
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
????
???????
Aragons
Arpetan
???????
Asturianu
Ava?e'?
Aymar aru
Az?rbaycanca
Bamanankan
?????
Ban-lam-g
?

 (?)?
Bikol Central

???????
Bosanski
Brezhoneg

Catal
?
?e?tina
Chi-Chewa
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
?
Espa?ol
Esperanto
Estreme?u
Euskara
?????
Fiji Hindi
F?royskt
Fran?ais
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gidhlig
Galego
MZ
G?k?y?
Z/Hak-ka-ng?

???
???????
??????
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue

slenska
Italiano
?????
Basa Jawa
Kalaallisut
?????
Kapampangan
-
???????
??
Kernowek
Kiswahili

Kongo
Kreyl ayisyen
Kurd?

Ladino

???
Latina
Latvie?u
L?tzebuergesch
Lietuvi?
Limburgs
Lingla
La .lojban.
Lumbaart
Magyar

Malagasy
??????
Mori
?????
????
????????
Bahasa Melayu
Mng-d??ng-ng??
Mirands

??????????
Nhuatl
Na Vosa Vakaviti
Nederlands
??????
????? ????
Z

Norsk bokm?l
Norsk nynorsk
Novial
Occitan
 
O?zbekcha/?
??????
??????
????
Piemontis
Polski
Portugus
Qaraqalpaqsha
Roman?
Rumantsch
Runa Simi


 
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
?????
Simple English
Sloven?ina
Sloven??ina
?l?nski
?????? ???????
 / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / 
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
?????
Tarandne
/tatar?a
??????
???
??
Tsetshestahese
Trk?e
Trkmen?e
Twi

?
????
???????? / Uyghurche
Vahcuengh
Vneto
Veps?n kel
Ti?ng Vi?t
Volapk
V?ro

Winaray

??????
Z
Zazaki
?emait??ka

Edit links
This page was last modified on 22 July 2016, at 23:32.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
 Page semi-protected
New York
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from New york)
This article is about the state of New York. For the city, see New York City. For other uses, see New York (disambiguation) and NY (disambiguation).
State of New York
Flag of New York	State seal of New York
Flag	Seal
Nickname(s): The Empire State
Motto(s): Excelsior (Latin)[1]
Ever upward
State song(s): "I Love New York"
Map of the United States with New York highlighted
Official language	None
Spoken languages	
English (only) 69.6%
Spanish 15.1%
Chinese 3.1%
Indic 1.9%
French 1.6%
Russian 1.2%
Italian 0.9%
Yiddish 0.7%
Arabic 0.5%
Korean 0.5%[2]
Demonym	New Yorker
Capital	Albany
Largest city	New York City
Largest metro	New York City metropolitan area
Area	Ranked 27th
 ? Total	54,555[3] sq mi
(141,300 km2)
 ? Width	285 miles (455 km)
 ? Length	330 miles (530 km)
 ? % water	13.5
 ? Latitude	40?30 N to 45?1 N
 ? Longitude	71?51 W to 79?46 W
Population	Ranked 4th
 ? Total	19,795,791 (2015 est)[4]
 ? Density	416.42/sq mi  (159/km2)
Ranked 7th
Elevation	
 ? Highest point	Mount Marcy[5][6][7]
5,344 ft (1,629 m)
 ? Mean	1,000 ft  (300 m)
 ? Lowest point	Atlantic Ocean[6][7]
sea level
Admission to Union	July 26, 1788 (11th)
Governor	Andrew Cuomo (D)
Lieutenant Governor	Kathy Hochul (D)
Legislature	New York Legislature
 ? Upper house	State Senate
 ? Lower house	State Assembly
U.S. Senators	Chuck Schumer (D)
Kirsten Gillibrand (D)
U.S. House delegation	18 Democrats,
9 Republicans (list)
Time zone	Eastern: UTC -5/-4
ISO 3166	US-NY
Abbreviations	NY
Website	www.ny.gov
New York state symbols
Flag of New York.svg
The Flag of New York
Seal of New York.svg
The Seal of New York
Living insignia
Bird	Eastern bluebird
Fish	Brook trout (fresh water), Striped bass (salt water)
Flower	Rose
Insect	Nine-spotted ladybug
Mammal	Beaver
Reptile	Common snapping turtle
Tree	Sugar maple
Inanimate insignia
Beverage	Milk
Fossil	Eurypterus remipes
Gemstone	Garnet
Motto	Excelsior
Shell	Bay scallop
Song	"I Love New York"
State route marker
New York state route marker
State quarter
New York quarter dollar coin
Released in 2001
Lists of United States state symbols
New York is a state in the Northeastern United States and is the 27th-most extensive, fourth-most populous, and seventh-most densely populated U.S. state. New York is bordered by New Jersey and Pennsylvania to the south and Connecticut, Massachusetts, and Vermont to the east. The state has a maritime border in the Atlantic Ocean with Rhode Island, east of Long Island, as well as an international border with the Canadian provinces of Quebec to the north and Ontario to the west and north. The state of New York, with an estimated 19.8 million residents in 2015,[4] is often referred to as New York State to distinguish it from New York City, the state's most populous city and its economic hub.

With an estimated population of 8.55 million in 2015,[8] New York City is the most populous city in the United States and the premier gateway for legal immigration to the United States.[9][10][11] The New York City Metropolitan Area is one of the most populous urban agglomerations in the world.[12][13] New York City is a global city,[14] exerting a significant impact upon commerce, finance, media, art, fashion, research, technology, education, and entertainment, its fast pace[15] defining the term New York minute.[16] The home of the United Nations Headquarters,[17] New York City is an important center for international diplomacy[18] and has been described as the cultural and financial capital of the world,[19][20][21][22][23] as well as the world's most economically powerful city.[24][23][25] New York City makes up over 40% of the population of New York State. Two-thirds of the state's population lives in the New York City Metropolitan Area, and nearly 40% lives on Long Island.[8] Both the state and New York City were named for the 17th century Duke of York, future King James II of England. The next four most populous cities in the state are Buffalo, Rochester, Yonkers, and Syracuse, while the state capital is Albany.

New York had been inhabited by tribes of Algonquian and Iroquoian-speaking Native Americans for several hundred years by the time the earliest Europeans came to New York. The first Europeans to arrive were French colonists and Jesuit missionaries who arrived southward from settlements at Montreal for trade and proselytizing. In 1609, the region was claimed by Henry Hudson for the Dutch, who built Fort Nassau in 1614 at the confluence of the Hudson and Mohawk rivers, where the present-day capital of Albany later developed. The Dutch soon also settled New Amsterdam and parts of the Hudson Valley, establishing the colony of New Netherland, a multicultural community from its earliest days and a center of trade and immigration. The British annexed the colony from the Dutch in 1664. The borders of the British colony, the Province of New York, were similar to those of the present-day state.

Many landmarks in New York are well known to both international and domestic visitors, with New York State hosting four of the world's ten most-visited tourist attractions in 2013: Times Square, Central Park, Niagara Falls (shared with Ontario), and Grand Central Terminal.[26] New York is home to the Statue of Liberty, a symbol of the United States and its ideals of freedom, democracy, and opportunity.[27] In the 21st century, New York has emerged as a global node of creativity and entrepreneurship,[28] social tolerance,[29] and environmental sustainability.[30][31] New York's higher education network comprises approximately 200 colleges and universities, including Columbia University, Cornell University, New York University, and Rockefeller University, which have been ranked among the top 35 in the world.[32][33]

Contents
1	History
1.1	16th century
1.2	17th century
1.3	18th century, the American Revolution, and statehood
1.4	19th century
1.5	Immigration
1.6	September 11, 2001 attacks
1.7	Hurricane Sandy, 2012
2	Geography
2.1	Climate
2.2	Statescape
2.3	Regions
2.4	Adjacent geographic entities
2.5	State parks
2.6	National parks, monuments, and historic landmarks
2.7	Administrative divisions
3	Demographics
3.1	Population
3.2	Most populous counties
3.3	Major cities
3.4	Metropolitan areas
3.5	Racial and ancestral makeup
3.6	Languages
3.7	Religion
3.8	Sexual and gender orientation
4	Economy
4.1	Wall Street
4.2	Silicon Alley
4.3	Microelectronic hardware, photographic processing, and biotechnology
4.4	Media and entertainment
4.5	Tourism
4.6	Exports
5	Education
6	Transportation
7	Government and politics
7.1	Government
7.1.1	Capital punishment
7.1.2	Federal representation
7.2	Politics
8	Sports
9	See also
10	References
11	Further reading
12	External links
History
Main article: History of New York
16th century
In 1524, Giovanni da Verrazzano, an Italian explorer in the service of the French crown, explored the Atlantic coast of North America between the Carolinas and Newfoundland, including New York Harbor and Narragansett Bay. On April 17, 1524 Verrazanno entered New York Bay, by way of the Strait now called the Narrows into the northern bay which he named Santa Margherita, in honour of the King of France's sister. Verrazzano described it as "a vast coastline with a deep delta in which every kind of ship could pass" and he adds: "that it extends inland for a league and opens up to form a beautiful lake. This vast sheet of water swarmed with native boats". He landed on the tip of Manhattan and perhaps on the furthest point of Long Island. Verrazanno's stay in this place was interrupted by a storm which pushed him north towards Martha's Vineyard.[34]

In 1540 French traders from New France built a chateau on Castle Island, within present-day Albany; due to flooding, it was abandoned the next year. In 1614, the Dutch under the command of Hendrick Corstiaensen, rebuilt the French chateau, which they called Fort Nassau. Fort Nassau was the first Dutch settlement in North America, and was located along the Hudson River, also within present-day Albany. The small fort served as a trading post and warehouse. Located on the Hudson River flood plain, the rudimentary "fort" was washed away by flooding in 1617,[35] and abandoned for good after Fort Orange (New Netherland) was built nearby in 1623.[36]

17th century
See also: Province of New York
Henry Hudson's 1609 voyage marked the beginning of European involvement with the area. Sailing for the Dutch East India Company and looking for a passage to Asia, he entered the Upper New York Bay on September 11 of that year.[37] Word of his findings encouraged Dutch merchants to explore the coast in search for profitable fur trading with local Native American tribes.

During the 17th century, Dutch trading posts established for the trade of pelts from the Lenape, Iroquois, and other tribes were founded in the colony of New Netherland. The first of these trading posts were Fort Nassau (1614, near present-day Albany); Fort Orange (1624, on the Hudson River just south of the current city of Albany and created to replace Fort Nassau), developing into settlement Beverwijck (1647), and into what became Albany; Fort Amsterdam (1625, to develop into the town New Amsterdam which is present-day New York City); and Esopus, (1653, now Kingston). The success of the patroonship of Rensselaerswyck (1630), which surrounded Albany and lasted until the mid-19th century, was also a key factor in the early success of the colony. The English captured the colony during the Second Anglo-Dutch War and governed it as the Province of New York. The city of New York was recaptured by the Dutch in 1673 during the Third Anglo-Dutch War (1672C1674) and renamed New Orange. It was returned to the English under the terms of the Treaty of Westminster a year later.[38]

18th century, the American Revolution, and statehood

New York and neighboring jurisdictions in 1777
The Sons of Liberty were organized in New York City during the 1760s, largely in response to the oppressive Stamp Act passed by the British Parliament in 1765. The Stamp Act Congress met in the city on October 19 of that year, composed of representatives from across the Thirteen Colonies who set the stage for the Continental Congress to follow. The Stamp Act Congress resulted in the Declaration of Rights and Grievances, which was the first written expression by representatives of the Americans of many of the rights and complaints later expressed in the United States Declaration of Independence. This included the right to representative government. At the same time, with strong trading between Britain and the United States on both business and personal levels many New York residents were Loyalists. The Capture of Fort Ticonderoga provided the cannon and gunpowder necessary to force a British withdrawal from the Siege of Boston in 1775.

New York was the only colony to not vote for independence, as the delegates were not authorized to do so. New York then endorsed the Declaration of Independence on July 9, 1776.[39] The New York State Constitution was framed by a convention which assembled at White Plains on July 10, 1776, and after repeated adjournments and changes of location, terminated its labors at Kingston on Sunday evening, April 20, 1777, when the new constitution drafted by John Jay was adopted with but one dissenting vote. It was not submitted to the people for ratification. On July 30, 1777, George Clinton was inaugurated as the first Governor of New York at Kingston.

About one-third of the battles of the American Revolutionary War took place in New York; the first major battle after U.S. independence was declaredand the largest battle of the entire warwas fought in New York at the Battle of Long Island (a.k.a. Battle of Brooklyn) in August 1776. After their victory, the British occupied New York City, making it their military and political base of operations in North America for the duration of the conflict, and consequently the focus of General George Washington's intelligence network. On the notorious British prison ships of Wallabout Bay, more American combatants died of intentional neglect than were killed in combat in every battle of the war, combined. Both sides of combatants lost more soldiers to disease than to outright wounds.The first of two major British armies were captured by the Continental Army at the Battle of Saratoga in 1777, a success that influenced France to ally with the revolutionaries.The state constitution was enacted in 1777. New York became the 11th state to ratify the United States Constitution, on July 26, 1788.

Preceded by
Virginia	List of U.S. states by date of statehood
Ratified Constitution on July 26, 1788 (11th)	Succeeded by
North Carolina

British general John Burgoyne surrenders at Saratoga in 1777.
In an attempt to retain their sovereignty and remain an independent nation positioned between the new United States and British North America, four of the Iroquois Nations fought on the side of the British; only the Oneida and their dependents, the Tuscarora, allied themselves with the Americans.[40] In retaliation for attacks on the frontier led by Joseph Brant and Loyalist Mohawk forces, the Sullivan Expedition of 1779 destroyed nearly 50 Iroquois villages, adjacent croplands and winter stores, forcing many refugees to British-held Niagara.[41]

As allies of the British, the Iroquois were forced out of New York, although they had not been part of treaty negotiations. They resettled in Canada after the war and were given land grants by the Crown. In the treaty settlement, the British ceded most Indian lands to the new United States. Because New York made treaty with the Iroquois without getting Congressional approval, some of the land purchases have been subject to land claim suits since the late 20th century by the federally recognized tribes. New York put up more than 5 million acres (20,000 km2) of former Iroquois territory for sale in the years after the Revolutionary War, leading to rapid development in upstate New York.[42] As per the Treaty of Paris, the last vestige of British authority in the former Thirteen Coloniestheir troops in New York Citydeparted in 1783, which was long afterward celebrated as Evacuation Day.[43]


1800 map of New York from Low's Encyclopaedia
New York City was the national capital under the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union, the first government. That organization was found to be insufficient, and prominent New Yorker Alexander Hamilton advocated a new government that would include an executive, national courts, and the power to tax. Hamilton led the Annapolis Convention (1786) that called for the Philadelphia Convention, which drafted the United States Constitution, in which he also took part. The new government was to be a strong federal national government to replace the relatively weaker confederation of individual states. Following heated debate, which included the publication of the now quintessential constitutional interpretationThe Federalist Papersas a series of installments in New York City newspapers, New York was the 11th state to ratify the United States Constitution, on July 26, 1788.[44] New York remained the national capital under the new constitution until 1790, and was the site of the inauguration of President George Washington, the drafting of United States Bill of Rights, and the first session of the United States Supreme Court. Hamilton's revival of the heavily indebted United States economy after the war and the creation of a national bank significantly contributed to New York City becoming the financial center of the new nation.

Both the Dutch and the British imported African slaves as laborers to the city and colony; New York had the second-highest population of slaves after Charleston, SC. Slavery was extensive in New York City and some agricultural areas. The state passed a law for the gradual abolition of slavery soon after the Revolutionary War, but the last slave in New York was not freed until 1827.

19th century

The Erie Canal at Lockport, New York in 1839
Transportation in western New York was by expensive wagons on muddy roads before canals opened up the rich farm lands to long-distance traffic. Governor DeWitt Clinton promoted the Erie Canal that connected New York City to the Great Lakes, by the Hudson River, the new canal, and the rivers and lakes. Work commenced in 1817, and the Erie Canal opened in 1825. Packet boats pulled by horses on tow paths traveled slowly over the canal carrying passengers and freight.[45] Farm products came in from the Midwest, and finished manufactured moved west. It was an engineering marvel which opened up vast areas of New York to commerce and settlement. It enabled Great Lakes port cities such as Buffalo and Rochester to grow and prosper. It also connected the burgeoning agricultural production of the Midwest and shipping on the Great Lakes, with the port of New York City. Improving transportation, it enabled additional population migration to territories west of New York. After 1850, railroads largely replaced the canal.[46]

New York City was a major ocean port and had extensive traffic importing cotton from the South and exporting manufacturing goods. Nearly half of the state's exports were related to cotton. Southern cotton factors, planters and bankers visited so often that they had favorite hotels.[47] At the same time, activism for abolitionism was strong upstate, where some communities provided stops on the Underground Railroad. Upstate, and New York City, gave strong support for the American Civil War In terms of finances, volunteer soldiers, and supplies. The state provided more than 370,000 soldiers to the Union armies. Over 53,000 New Yorkers died in service, roughly one of every seven who served. However, Irish draft riots in 1862 were a significant embarrassment.[48][49]

Immigration
Further information: Ellis Island

Castle Garden when it served as New York's first immigrant depot. Over 8 million immigrants passed through these doors.

Ellis Island in 1905
File:Ellis Island immigration footage.ogg
Scenes at the Immigration Depot and a nearby dock on Ellis Island
Since the early 19th century, New York City has been the largest port of entry for legal immigration into the United States. Immigration has built the city and nation. In the United States, the federal government did not assume direct jurisdiction for immigration until 1890. Prior to this time, the matter was delegated to the individual states, then via contract between the states and the federal government. Most immigrants to New York would disembark at the bustling docks along the Hudson and East Rivers, in the eventual Lower Manhattan. On May 4, 1847 the New York State Legislature created the Board of Commissioners of Immigration to regulate immigration.[50]

The first permanent immigration depot in New York was established in 1855 at Castle Garden, a converted War of 1812 era fort located within what is now Battery Park, at the tip of Lower Manhattan. The first immigrants to arrive at the new depot were aboard three ships that had just been released from quarantine. Castle Garden served as New York's immigrant depot until it closed on April 18, 1890 when the federal government assumed control over immigration. During that period, more than 8 million immigrants passed through its doors (two out of every three U.S. immigrants).[51]

When the federal government assumed control, it established the Bureau of Immigration, which chose the three-acre Ellis Island in Upper New York Harbor for an entry depot. Already federally controlled, the island had served as an ammunition depot. It was chosen due its relative isolation with proximity to New York City and the rail lines of Jersey City, New Jersey, via a short ferry ride. While the island was being developed and expanded via land reclamation, the federal government operated a temporary depot at the Barge Office at the Battery.[52]

Ellis Island opened on January 1, 1892, and operated as a central immigration center until the National Origins Act was passed in 1924, reducing immigration. After that date, the only immigrants to pass through were displaced persons or war refugees. The island ceased all immigration processing on November 12, 1954 when the last person detained on the island, Norwegian seaman Arne Peterssen, was released. He had overstayed his shore leave and left on the 10:15 a.m. Manhattan-bound ferry to return to his ship.

More than 12 million immigrants passed through Ellis Island between 1892 and 1954. In the 21st century, more than 100 million Americans across the United States can trace their ancestry to these immigrants.

Ellis Island was the subject of a contentious and long-running border and jurisdictional dispute between New York State and the State of New Jersey, as both claimed it. The issue was settled in 1998 by the U.S. Supreme Court which ruled that the original 3.3-acre (1.3 ha) island was New York State territory and that the balance of the 27.5 acres (11 ha) added after 1834 by landfill was in New Jersey.[53] The island was added to the National Park Service system in May 1965 by President Lyndon B. Johnson and is still owned by the Federal government as part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument. Ellis Island was opened to the public as a museum of immigration in 1990.[54]

September 11, 2001 attacks
Two talk gray, rectangular buildings spewing black smoke and flames, particularly from the left of the two.
United Airlines Flight 175 hits the South Tower of the original World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan on September 11, 2001.
Main article: September 11 attacks
On September 11, 2001, two of four hijacked planes were flown into the Twin Towers of the original World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan, and the towers collapsed. 7 World Trade Center also collapsed due to damage from fires. The other buildings of the World Trade Center complex were damaged beyond repair and demolished soon thereafter. The collapse of the Twin Towers caused extensive damage and resulted in the deaths of 2,753 victims, including 147 aboard the two planes. Since September 11, most of Lower Manhattan has been restored. In the years since, many rescue workers and residents of the area have developed several life-threatening illnesses, and some have already died.[55]

A memorial at the site was opened to the public on September 11, 2011. A permanent museum later opened at the site on March 21, 2014. Upon its completion in 2014, the new One World Trade Center became the tallest skyscraper in the Western Hemisphere, at 1,776 feet (541 m).[56] Other skyscrapers are under construction at the site.


Flooding on Avenue C in Lower Manhattan, caused by Hurricane Sandy on October 29, 2012.[57]
Hurricane Sandy, 2012
Main article: Effects of Hurricane Sandy in New York
On October 29 and 30, 2012, Hurricane Sandy caused extensive destruction of the state's shorelines, ravaging portions of New York City and Long Island with record-high storm surge, with severe flooding and high winds causing power outages for hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers, and leading to gasoline shortages and disruption of mass transit systems. The storm and its profound effects have prompted the discussion of constructing seawalls and other coastal barriers around the shorelines of New York City and Long Island to minimize the risk from another such future event. This is considered highly probable due to global warming and rise in sea levels.[58][59]


Enveloped by the Atlantic Ocean and Long Island Sound, New York City and Long Island alone are home to approximately 11 million residents conjointly.

The Adirondack Mountains of Upstate New York form the southernmost zone in the Eastern forest-boreal transition ecoregion of North America.

The hydrologic source of the Hudson River is near or at Lake Tear of the Clouds, a small tarn in the Adironacks, photo circa 19th-century.

Lake George, one of numerous oligotrophic lakes in the Adirondack region, is nicknamed the Queen of American Lakes.

Mirror Lake in the Village of Lake Placid in the Adirondacks, site of the 1932 and the 1980 Winter Olympics.

Lake Flower in the Village of Saranac Lake, nicknamed the Capital of the Adirondacks.

The Adirondack High Peaks region.
Geography
Main article: Geography of New York

New York terrain.

Map of the Hudson and Mohawk rivers.

The Bear Mountain Bridge, spanning the Hudson River in the Hudson Valley.
New York covers 54,555 square miles (141,300 km2) and ranks as the 27th largest state by size.[3] The Great Appalachian Valley dominates eastern New York and contains the Lake Champlain Valley as its northern half and the Hudson Valley as its southern half within the state. The rugged Adirondack Mountains, with vast tracts of wilderness, lie west of the Lake Champlain Valley. The Hudson River begins near Lake Tear of the Clouds and flows south through the eastern part of the state without draining Lakes George or Champlain. Lake George empties at its north end into Lake Champlain, whose northern end extends into Canada, where it drains into the Richelieu River and then ultimately the Saint Lawrence River. Four of New York City's five boroughs are situated on three islands at the mouth of the Hudson River: Manhattan Island; Staten Island; and Long Island, which contains Brooklyn and Queens at its western end.

Most of the southern part of the state rests on the Allegheny Plateau, which extends from the southeastern United States to the Catskill Mountains; the section in New York State is known as the Southern Tier. The Tug Hill region arises as a cuesta east of Lake Ontario. The western section of the state is drained by the Allegheny River and rivers of the Susquehanna and Delaware River systems. The Delaware River Basin Compact, signed in 1961 by New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and the federal government, regulates the utilization of water of the Delaware system. The highest elevation in New York is Mount Marcy in the Adirondacks, at 5,344 feet (1,629 meters) above sea level; while the state's lowest point is at sea level, on the Atlantic Ocean.[60]

Much of New York State borders water, as is true for New York City as well. Of New York State's total area, 13.5% consists of water. The state's borders touch (clockwise from the west) two Great Lakes (Lake Erie and Lake Ontario, which are connected by the Niagara River); the provinces of Ontario and Quebec in Canada, with New York and Ontario sharing the Thousand Islands archipelago within the Saint Lawrence River; Lake Champlain; three New England states (Vermont, Massachusetts, and Connecticut); the Atlantic Ocean, and two Mid-Atlantic states, New Jersey and Pennsylvania. In addition, Rhode Island shares a water border with New York. New York is the second largest of the original Thirteen Colonies and is the only state that touches both the Great Lakes and the Atlantic Ocean.

In contrast with New York City's urban landscape, the vast majority of the state's geographic area is dominated by meadows, forests, rivers, farms, mountains, and lakes. New York's Adirondack Park is the largest state park in the United States and is larger than the Yellowstone, Yosemite, Grand Canyon, Glacier, and Olympic National Parks combined.[61] New York established the first state park in the United States at Niagara Falls in 1885. Niagara Falls is shared between New York and Ontario as it flows on the Niagara River from Lake Erie to Lake Ontario.

Upstate and downstate are often used informally to distinguish New York City or its greater metropolitan area from the rest of New York State. The placement of a boundary between the two is a matter of great contention.[62] Unofficial and loosely defined regions of Upstate New York include the Southern Tier, which often includes the counties along the border with Pennsylvania,[63] and the North Country, which can mean anything from the strip along the Canadian border to everything north of the Mohawk River.[64]

Climate
Main article: Climate of New York

Lake-effect snow is a major contributor to heavy snowfall totals in western New York, including the Tug Hill region.

Skaneateles Lake, one of the eleven Finger Lakes, provides drinking water for the city of Syracuse and nearby areas in central New York.
In general, New York has a humid continental climate, though under the K?ppen climate classification, New York City has a humid subtropical climate.[65] Weather in New York is heavily influenced by two continental air masses: a warm, humid one from the southwest and a cold, dry one from the northwest.

Downstate New York, comprising New York City, Long Island, and lower portions of the Hudson Valley, has rather warm summers, with some periods of high humidity, and cold, damp winters which, however, are relatively mild compared to temperatures in Upstate New York, secondary to the former region's lower elevation, proximity to the Atlantic Ocean, and relatively lower latitude compared to the latter. Upstate New York experiences warm summers, marred by only occasional, brief intervals of sultry conditions, with long and cold winters. Western New York, particularly the Tug Hill region, receives heavy lake-effect snows, especially during the earlier portions of winter, before the surface of Lake Ontario itself is covered by ice. The summer climate is cool in the Adirondacks, Catskills, and at higher elevations of the Southern Tier.

Summer daytime temperatures usually range from the upper 70s to mid-80s F (25 to 30 C), over much of the state. In the majority of winter seasons, a temperature of ?13 F (?25 C) or lower can be expected in the northern highlands (Northern Plateau) and 5 F (?15 C) or colder in the southwestern and east-central highlands of the Southern Tier.

New York ranks 46th among the 50 states in the amount of greenhouse gases generated per person. This relative efficient energy usage is primarily due to the dense, compact settlement in the New York City metropolitan area, and the state population's high rate of mass transit use in this area and between major cities.[66]

Monthly normal high and low temperatures for New York cities (F)[67]
(Fahrenheit)
City		 Jan 	 Feb 	 Mar 	  Apr 	 May 	 Jun 	 Jul 	 Aug 	 Sep 	 Oct 	 Nov 	 Dec 
Albany	max
min	31
13	34
16	44
25	57
36	70
46	78
55	82
60	80
58	71
50	60
39	48
31	36
20
Binghamton	max
min	28
15	31
17	41
25	53
35	66
46	73
54	78
59	76
57	68
50	57
40	44
31	33
21
Buffalo	max
min	31
18	33
19	42
26	54
36	66
48	75
57	80
62	78
60	70
53	59
43	47
34	36
24
Lake Placid	max
min	27
5	32
8	40
16	54
29	66
39	74
48	78
53	76
51	69
44	56
34	44
25	32
12
Long Beach	max
min	39
23	40
24	48
31	58
40	69
49	77
60	83
66	82
64	75
57	64
45	54
36	44
28
New York City	max
min	38
26	41
28	50
35	61
44	71
54	79
63	84
69	82
68	75
60	64
50	53
41	43
32
Rochester	max
min	31
17	33
17	43
25	55
35	68
46	77
55	81
60	79
59	71
51	60
41	47
33	36
23
Syracuse	max
min	31
14	34
16	43
24	56
35	68
46	77
55	82
60	80
59	71
51	60
40	47
32	36
21
Monthly normal high and low temperatures for New York cities (C)
(Celsius)
City		 Jan 	 Feb 	 Mar 	  Apr 	 May 	 Jun 	 Jul 	 Aug 	 Sep 	 Oct 	 Nov 	 Dec 
Albany	max
min	?1
?11	1
?9	7
?4	14
2	21
8	26
13	28
16	27
14	22
10	16
4	9
?1	2
?7
Binghamton	max
min	?2
?9	?1
?8	5
?4	12
2	19
8	23
12	26
15	24
14	20
10	14
4	7
?1	1
?6
Buffalo	max
min	?1
?8	1
?7	6
?3	12
2	19
9	24
14	27
17	26
16	21
12	15
6	8
1	2
?4
Lake Placid	max
min	?3
?15	0
?13	4
?9	12
?2	19
4	23
9	26
12	24
11	21
7	13
1	7
?4	0
?11
Long Beach	max
min	4
?5	4
?4	9
?1	14
4	21
9	25
16	28
19	28
18	24
14	18
7	12
2	7
?2
New York City	max
min	3
?3	5
?2	10
2	16
7	22
12	26
17	29
21	28
20	24
16	18
10	12
5	6
0
Rochester	max
min	?1
?8	1
?8	6
?4	13
2	20
8	25
13	27
16	26
15	22
11	16
5	8
1	2
?5
Syracuse	max
min	?1
?10	1
?9	6
?4	13
2	20
8	25
13	28
16	27
15	22
11	16
4	8
0	2
?6
Converted from Fahrenheit data (above)
Statescape

The skyscrapers of New York City, the most populous U.S. city with 8.6 million residents in 2015, are mostly situated in Manhattan, seen here in this panorama viewed across the Hudson River from Weehawken, New Jersey, in January 2015. One57 and 432 Park Avenue are noted left of center; the Empire State Building, right of center; and on the far right of the picture, One World Trade Center, the tallest skyscraper in the Western Hemisphere, as well as Four World Trade Center, 70 Pine Street, the Woolworth Building, and 40 Wall Street. At the center of the skyline picture, the Chrysler Building, The New York Times Building, and the Conde Nast Building can be picked out of the crowd by their spires.

Niagara Falls, in the Niagara Falls National Heritage Area, flows on the Niagara River connecting Lake Ontario and Lake Erie, two of the five Great Lakes of North America.

View of the Adirondack Mountains from the 5,344-foot (1,629-meter) summit of Mount Marcy, New York's tallest peak.

Panorama of the state capital Albany and the Hudson River from Rensselaer. At the left foreground is the System Administration Building of the State University of New York. The tallest skyscraper visible is one of several buildings in the Empire State Plaza governmental complex.

The Thousand Islands constitute an archipelago within the Saint Lawrence River. Boldt Castle, on Heart Island, is seen at center.

The Great Peconic Bay, with the Atlantic Ocean as its primary inflow, separates the North Fork and South Fork at the East End of Long Island.
Regions
Main article: List of regions of the United States  New York

Economic regions of New York
Due to its long history, the state of New York has several overlapping (and often conflicting) definitions of regions within the state. This is further exacerbated by the colloquial use of such regional labels. The New York State Department of Economic Development provides two distinct definitions of these regions. The department divides the state into ten economic regions,[68] which approximately correspond to terminology used by residents:

Western New York
Finger Lakes
Southern Tier
Central New York
North Country
Mohawk Valley
Capital District
Hudson Valley
New York City
Long Island

Tourism regions of New York
The Department of Economic Development also groups the counties into eleven regions for tourism purposes:[69]

ChautauquaCAllegheny
Niagara Frontier
Finger Lakes
Thousand Islands
Central-Leatherstocking Region
Adirondack Mountains
Capital District
Catskill Mountains
Hudson Valley
New York City
Long Island
Adjacent geographic entities

 Ontario, Canada	 Quebec, Canada	 Quebec, Canada	
 Ontario, Canada		 Vermont
 Massachusetts
 Connecticut
Atlantic Ocean*,  Rhode Island
	  New York: Outline ? Index  	

 Pennsylvania	 Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Atlantic Ocean	Atlantic Ocean
*The Atlantic Ocean lies south, southeast, and east of Long Island.

State parks
See also: List of New York state parks and New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation

Two major state parks (in green) are the Adirondack Park (north) and the Catskill Park (south).
New York has many state parks and two major forest preserves. Adirondack Park, roughly the size of the state of Vermont and the largest state park in the United States,[70] was established in 1892 and given state constitutional protection to remain "forever wild" in 1894. The park is larger than Yellowstone, Everglades, Glacier, and Grand Canyon national parks combined.[70] The thinking that led to the creation of the Park first appeared in George Perkins Marsh's Man and Nature, published in 1864.

The Catskill Park was protected in legislation passed in 1885,[71] which declared that its land was to be conserved and never put up for sale or lease. Consisting of 700,000 acres (2,800 km2) of land,[71] the park is a habitat for bobcats, minks, and fishers. There are some 400 black bears living in the region.[72] The state operates numerous campgrounds, and there are over 300 miles (480 km) of multi-use trails in the Park.

The Montauk Point State Park boasts the 1797 Montauk Lighthouse, commissioned under President George Washington, which is a major tourist attraction on the easternmost tip of Long Island. Hither Hills park offers camping and is a popular destination with surfcasting sport fishermen.

National parks, monuments, and historic landmarks

The Statue of Liberty in New York Harbor is a symbol of the United States and its ideals of freedom, democracy, and opportunity.[73]

African Burial Ground National Monument

General Shuyler's house at Saratoga National Historical Park.
The State of New York is well represented in the National Park System with 22 national parks, which received 16,349,381 visitors in 2011. In addition, there are 4 National Heritage Areas, 27 National Natural Landmarks, 262 National Historic Landmarks, and 5,379 listings on the National Register of Historic Places.

African Burial Ground National Monument in Lower Manhattan is the only National Monument dedicated to Americans of African ancestry. It preserves a site containing the remains of more than 400 Africans buried during the late 17th and 18th centuries in a portion of what was the largest colonial-era cemetery for people of African descent, both free and enslaved, with an estimated tens of thousands of remains interred. The site's excavation and study were called "the most important historic urban archeological project in the United States."[74]
Fire Island National Seashore is a United States National Seashore that protects a 26-mile (42 km) section of Fire Island, an approximately 30-mile (48 km) long barrier island separated from the mainland of Long Island by the Great South Bay. The island is part of Suffolk County.
Gateway National Recreation Area is more than 26,000 acres (10,522 ha) of water, salt marsh, wetlands, islands, and shoreline at the entrance to New York Harbor, the majority of which lies within New York. Including areas on Long Island and in New Jersey, it covers more area than that of two Manhattan Islands.
General Grant National Memorial is the final resting place of President Ulysses S. Grant and is the largest mausoleum in North America.
Hamilton Grange National Memorial preserves the home of Alexander Hamilton, Caribbean immigrant and orphan who rose to be a United States founding father and associate of George Washington.
Home of Franklin D. Roosevelt National Historic Site, established in 1945, preserves the Springwood estate in Hyde Park, New York. Springwood was the birthplace, lifelong home, and burial place of the 32nd President of the United States, Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Niagara Falls National Heritage Area was designated by Congress in 2008; it stretches from the western boundary of Wheatfield, New York to the mouth of the Niagara River on Lake Ontario, including the communities of Niagara Falls, Youngstown, and Lewiston. It includes Niagara Falls State Park and Colonial Niagara Historic District. It is managed in collaboration with the state.
Saratoga National Historical Park preserves the site of the Battles of Saratoga, the first significant American military victory of the American Revolutionary War. In 1777, American forces defeated a major British Army, which led France to recognize the independence of the United States, and enter the war as a decisive military ally of the struggling Americans.
Statue of Liberty National Monument includes Ellis Island and the Statue of Liberty. The statue, designed by Frdric Bartholdi, was a gift from France to the United States to mark the Centennial of the American Declaration of Independence; it was dedicated in New York Harbor on October 28, 1886. It has since become an icon of the United States and the concepts of democracy and freedom.
Stonewall National Monument, in the Greenwich Village neighborhood of Lower Manhattan, is the first U.S. National Monument dedicated to LGBTQ rights, designated on June 24, 2016. The monument comprises the Stonewall Inn, commonly recognized to be the cradle of the gay liberation movement as the site of the 1969 Stonewall Riots; the adjacent Christopher Park; and surrounding streets and sidewalks.[75][76][77]
Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace National Historic Site is the birthplace and childhood home of President Theodore Roosevelt, the only US President born in New York City.
Administrative divisions

Map of the counties in New York
Main article: Administrative divisions of New York
New York is divided into 62 counties. Aside from the five counties of New York City, each of these counties is subdivided into towns and cities. Towns can contain incorporated villages or unincorporated hamlets. New York City is divided into five boroughs, each coterminous with a county.

Downstate New York (New York City, Long Island, and the southern portion of the Hudson Valley) can be considered to form the central core of the Northeast megalopolis, an urbanized region stretching from New Hampshire to Virginia.

The major cities of the state developed along the key transportation and trade routes of the early 19th century, including the Erie Canal and railroads paralleling it. Today, the New York Thruway acts as a modern counterpart to commercial water routes.[78]

Demographics
Historical population
Census	Pop.		%
1790	340,120		
1800	589,051		73.2%
1810	959,049		62.8%
1820	1,372,812		43.1%
1830	1,918,608		39.8%
1840	2,428,921		26.6%
1850	3,097,394		27.5%
1860	3,880,735		25.3%
1870	4,382,759		12.9%
1880	5,082,871		16.0%
1890	6,003,174		18.1%
1900	7,268,894		21.1%
1910	9,113,614		25.4%
1920	10,385,227		14.0%
1930	12,588,066		21.2%
1940	13,479,142		7.1%
1950	14,830,192		10.0%
1960	16,782,304		13.2%
1970	18,236,967		8.7%
1980	17,558,072		?3.7%
1990	17,990,455		2.5%
2000	18,976,457		5.5%
2010	19,378,102		2.1%
Est. 2015	19,795,791		2.2%
Sources:
1910C2010 1790C1900[79]
2015 Estimate[4]
Main article: Demographics of New York
Population

New York population distribution map
The distribution of change in population growth is uneven in New York State; the New York City metropolitan area is growing considerably, along with Saratoga County and the Capital District, collectively known as Tech Valley. New York City gained more residents between April 2010 and July 2014 (316,000) than any other U.S. city.[80] Conversely, outside of the Rochester and Ithaca areas, population growth in much of Western New York is nearly stagnant. According to immigration statistics, the state is a leading recipient of migrants from around the globe. Between 2000 and 2005, immigration failed to surpass emigration, a trend that has been reversing since 2006. New York State lost two House seats in the 2011 congressional reapportionment, secondary to relatively slow growth when compared to the rest of the United States. In 2000 and 2005, more people moved from New York to Florida than from any one state to another, contributing to New York becoming the U.S.'s fourth most populous state in 2015, behind Florida, Texas, and California.[81] However, New York State has the second-largest international immigrant population in the country among the American states, at 4.2 million as of 2008; most reside in and around New York City, due to its size, high profile, vibrant economy, and cosmopolitan culture.

The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of New York was 19,795,791 on July 1, 2015, a 2.16% increase since the 2010 United States Census.[4] Despite the open land in the state, New York's population is very urban, with 92% of residents living in an urban area,[82] predominantly in the New York City metropolitan area.

Two-thirds of New York State's population resides in New York City Metropolitan Area. New York City is the most populous city in the United States,[83] with an estimated record high population of 8,550,405 in 2015,[8] incorporating more immigration into the city than emigration since the 2010 United States Census.[84] More than twice as many people live in New York City as in the second-most populous U.S. city (Los Angeles),[85] and within a smaller area. Long Island alone accounted for a Census-estimated 7,838,722 residents in 2015, representing 39.6% of New York State's population.[8][86][87][88][89]

Most populous counties
Main article: List of counties in New York
These are the ten counties with the largest populations as of 2010:[8][90]

Kings County (Brooklyn): 2,504,700
Queens County (Queens): 2,230,722
New York County (Manhattan): 1,585,873
Suffolk County: 1,493,350
Bronx County (the Bronx): 1,385,108
Nassau County: 1,339,532
Westchester County: 949,113
Erie County: 919,040
Monroe County: 744,344
Richmond County (Staten Island): 468,730
Major cities
Main article: List of cities in New York
Further information: List of towns in New York, List of villages in New York, and List of census-designated places in New York
There are 62 cities in New York. The largest city in the state and the most populous city in the United States is New York City, which comprises five counties (boroughs): Bronx, New York County (Manhattan), Queens, Kings County (Brooklyn), and Richmond County (Staten Island). New York City is home to more than two-fifths of the state's population. Albany, the state capital, is the sixth-largest city in New York State. The smallest city is Sherrill, New York, in Oneida County. Hempstead is the most populous town in the state; if it were a city, it would be the second largest in New York State, with over 700,000 residents.



  v t e
Largest cities or towns in New York
http://www.citypopulation.de/USA-NewYork.html
Rank		County	Pop.	
New York City
New York City
Buffalo
Buffalo	1	New York City	multiple	8,550,405[8]	Rochester
Rochester
Yonkers
Yonkers
2	Buffalo	Erie	261,310
3	Rochester	Monroe	210,565
4	Yonkers	Westchester	195,976
5	Syracuse	Onondaga	145,170
6	Albany	Albany	97,856
7	New Rochelle	Westchester	77,062
8	Mount Vernon	Westchester	67,292
9	Schenectady	Schenectady	66,135
10	Utica	Oneida	62,239
Metropolitan areas
Main article: New York statistical areas
The following are the top ten metropolitan areas in the state as of the 2010 Census:[91]

New York City and the Hudson Valley (19,567,410 in NY/NJ/PA, 13,038,826 in NY)
Buffalo-Niagara Falls (1,135,509)
Rochester (1,079,671)
Albany and the Capital District (870,716)
Syracuse (662,577)
Utica-Rome (299,397)
Binghamton (251,725)
Kingston (182,493)
Glens Falls (128,923)
Watertown-Fort Drum (116,229)
Racial and ancestral makeup


The Manhattan Chinatown (~sA), home to the highest concentration of Chinese people in the Western Hemisphere,[92][93][94] at top, and one of several Chinatowns in Brooklyn (A) below. Chinese in New York constitute the fastest-growing nationality in New York State and on Long Island,[10][11][95][96] with large-scale Chinese immigration continuing into New York.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the 2010 racial makeup of New York State was as follows by self-identification:[97]

White American C 65.7%
Black or African American C 15.9%
Asian American C 7.3% (3.0% Chinese, 1.6% Indian, 0.7% Korean, 0.5% Filipino, 0.3% Pakistani, 0.3% Bangladeshi, 0.2% Japanese, 0.1% Vietnamese)
Multiracial Americans C 3.0%
Native American/American Indian C 0.6%
Some other race - 7.5%
New York Racial Breakdown of Population
Racial composition	1950[98]	1970[98]	1990[98]	2000[99]	2010[100]
White	93.5%	86.8%	74.4%	67.9%	65.8%
Black	6.2%	11.9%	15.9%	15.9%	15.9%
Asian	0.2%	0.7%	3.9%	5.5%	7.3%
Native	0.1%	0.2%	0.3%	0.4%	0.6%
Native Hawaiian and
other Pacific Islander	C	C	C	0.1%	0.1%
Other race	C	0.4%	5.5%	7.1%	7.4%
Two or more races	C	C	C	3.1%	3.0%
In 2004, the major ancestry groups in New York State by self-identification were Hispanic and Latino Americans (17.6%), African American (15.8%), Italian (14.4%), Irish (12.9%), German (11.1%) and English (6%).[101] According to a 2010 estimate, 21.7% of the population is foreign-born.[97]


New York population ethnicity map
The state's most populous racial group, non-Hispanic white, has declined as a proportion of the state population from 94.6% in 1940 to 58.3% in 2010.[97][98] As of 2011, 55.6% of New York's population younger than age 1 were minorities.[102] New York's robustly increasing Jewish population, the largest outside of Israel,[103] was the highest among states both by percentage and absolute number in 2012.[104] It is driven by the high reproductive rate of Orthodox Jewish families,[105] particularly in Brooklyn and communities of the Hudson Valley.

New York is home to the second-largest African American population (after Georgia) and the second largest Asian-American population (after California) in the United States. New York's uniracial Black population increased by 2.0% between 2000 and 2010, to 3,073,800.[106] The Black population is in a state of flux, as New York is the largest recipient of immigrants from Africa,[95] while established African Americans are migrating out of New York to the southern United States.[107] The New York City neighborhood of Harlem has historically been a major cultural capital for African-Americans of sub-Saharan descent, and Bedford-Stuyvesant in Brooklyn has the largest such population in the United States. Meanwhile, New York's uniracial Asian population increased by a notable 36% from 2000 to 2010, to 1,420,244.[106] Queens, in New York City, is home to the state's largest Asian-American population and is the most ethnically diverse county in the United States; it is the most ethnically diverse urban area in the world.[108][109]

New York's growing uniracial Hispanic-or-Latino population numbered 3,416,922 in 2010,[110] a 19% increase from the 2,867,583 enumerated in 2000.[111] Queens is home to the largest Andean (Colombian, Ecuadorian, Peruvian, and Bolivian) populations in the United States. In addition, New York has the largest Puerto Rican, Dominican, and Jamaican American populations in the continental United States.

The Chinese population constitutes the fastest-growing nationality in New York State; multiple satellites of the original Manhattan Chinatown (DA), in Brooklyn (A), and around Flushing, Queens (A), are thriving as traditionally urban enclaves, while also expanding rapidly eastward into suburban Nassau County (}h),[112] on Long Island (Lu).[113] New York State has become the top destination for new Chinese immigrants, and large-scale Chinese immigration continues into the state.[95][96][114][115][116] A new China City of America is also planned in Sullivan County.[117] Long Island, including Queens and Nassau County, is also home to several Little Indias (??? ????) and a large Koreatown (? ???? ?????), with large and growing attendant populations of Indian Americans and Korean Americans, respectively. Brooklyn has been a destination for West Indian immigrants of African descent, as well as Asian Indian immigrants.

In the 2000 Census, New York had the largest Italian American population, composing the largest self-identified ancestral group in Staten Island and Long Island, followed by Irish Americans. Albany and the Mohawk Valley also have large communities of ethnic Italians and Irish Americans, reflecting 19th and early 20th-century immigration. In Buffalo and western New York, German-Americans comprise the largest ancestry. In the North Country of New York, French Canadians represent the leading ethnicity, given the area's proximity to Quebec. Americans of English ancestry are present throughout all of upstate New York, reflecting early colonial and later immigrants.

6.5% of New York's population were under five years of age, 24.7% under 18, and 12.9% were 65 or older. Females made up 51.8% of the state's population.

Languages
In 2010, the most common American English dialects spoken in New York, besides General American English, were the New York City area dialect (including New York Latino English and North Jersey English), the Western New England accent around Albany, and Inland Northern American English in Buffalo and western New York State. As many as 800 languages are spoken in New York City,[118][119][120] making it the most linguistically diverse city in the world.[121]

As of 2010, 70.72% (12,788,233) of New York residents aged five and older reported speaking only English at home, while 14.44% (2,611,903) spoke Spanish, 2.61% (472,955) Chinese (which includes Cantonese and Mandarin), 1.20% (216,468) Russian, 1.18% (213,785) Italian, 0.79% (142,169) French Creole, 0.75% (135,789) French, 0.67% (121,917) Yiddish, 0.63% (114,574) Korean, and Polish was spoken by 0.53% (95,413) of the population over the age of five. In total, 29.28% (5,295,016) of New York's population aged five and older reported speaking a language other than English.[122]

Religion
Religion			Percent(%)	
Christian	
 ?
60%
Jewish	
 ?
7%
Muslim	
 ?
2%
Hindu	
 ?
1%
Buddhist	
 ?
1%
Other	
 ?
0.6%
No religion	
 ?
27%
Most common non-English languages spoken in New York
Language	Percentage of population
(as of 2010)[122]
Spanish	14.44%
Chinese (including Cantonese and Mandarin)	2.61%
Russian	1.20%
Italian	1.18%
French Creole	0.79%
French	0.75%
Yiddish	0.67%
Korean	0.63%
Polish	0.53%
Bengali	0.43%
Religion
In 2010, the Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA) reported that the largest denominations were the Catholic Church with 6,286,916; Orthodox Judaism with 588,500; Islam with 392,953; and the United Methodist Church with 328,315 adherents.[123]


The landmark Neo-Gothic Roman Catholic St. Patrick's Cathedral, Midtown Manhattan.

Ultra-Orthodox Jewish (?????) residents in Brooklyn. Brooklyn's rapidly expanding Jewish community is the largest in the United States, with approximately 600,000 individuals.[124]

The Islamic Cultural Center of New York (Arabic:?????? ??????? ???????? ?? ???????) in Upper Manhattan.

Sri Maha Vallabha Ganapati Devasthanam (Tamil: ???? ??? ????? ????? ??????????), in Flushing, Queens, the oldest Hindu temple in the United States.

The Chuang Yen Monastery (f), in Kent, Putnam County, houses the largest indoor statue of Buddha in the Western Hemisphere.[125]

Atheism, promoted on an electronic billboard in Times Square, is observed by a significant proportion of New Yorkers.
Sexual and gender orientation


Gay pride parade, Albany at top, and International Transgender Day of Visibility introduced by Manila-born Geena Rocero in New York City below.
Roughly 3.8 percent of the state's adult population self-identifies as lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender. This constitutes a total LGBT adult population of 570,388 individuals.[126] In 2010, the number of same-sex couple households stood at roughly 48,932.[127] New York was the fifth state to license same-sex marriages, after New Hampshire. Michael Bloomberg, the Mayor of New York City, stated that "same-sex marriages in New York City have generated an estimated $259 million in economic impact and $16 million in City revenues" in the first year after the enactment of the Marriage Equality Act".[128] Same-sex marriages in New York were legalized on June 24, 2011 and were authorized to take place beginning 30 days thereafter.[129] New York City is also home to the largest transgender population in the United States, estimated at 25,000 in 2016.[130]

Economy
Main article: Economy of New York (state)
See also: New York locations by per capita income
2001 NY Proof.png

The New York Stock Exchange, the world's largest stock exchange by total market capitalization of its listed companies.[131]
Presidential $1 Reverse.png

Silicon Alley has expanded well beyond its cradle in the Flatiron District of Manhattan.

Midtown Manhattan in New York City, the largest central business district in the world.

Times Square in Midtown Manhattan, hub of the Broadway theater district, a media center, and one of the world's busiest pedestrian intersections.
New York's gross state product in 2015 was $1.44 trillion. If New York State were an independent nation, it would rank as the 12th or 13th largest economy in the world, depending upon international currency fluctuations. However, in 2013, the multi-state, New York City-centered Metropolitan Statistical Area produced a gross metropolitan product (GMP) of nearly US$1.39 trillion,[132] while in 2012, the corresponding Combined Statistical Area[133] generated a GMP of over US$1.55 trillion, both ranking first nationally by a wide margin and behind the GDP of only twelve nations and eleven nations, respectively.[134]

Wall Street
Main article: Wall Street
Anchored by Wall Street in the Financial District of Lower Manhattan, New York City has been called both the most economically powerful city and the leading financial center of the world.[23][24][135][136][137] Lower Manhattan is the third-largest central business district in the United States and is home to the New York Stock Exchange, on Wall Street, and the NASDAQ, at 165 Broadway, representing the world's largest and second largest stock exchanges, respectively, when measured both by overall average daily trading volume and by total market capitalization of their listed companies in 2013.[131][138] Investment banking fees on Wall Street totaled approximately $40 billion in 2012,[139] while in 2013, senior New York City bank officers who manage risk and compliance functions earned as much as $324,000 annually.[140] In fiscal year 2013-14, Wall Street's securities industry generated 19% of New York State's tax revenue.[141] New York City remains the largest global center for trading in public equity and debt capital markets, driven in part by the size and financial development of the U.S. economy.[142]:31C32[143] New York also leads in hedge fund management; private equity; and the monetary volume of mergers and acquisitions. Several investment banks and investment managers headquartered in Manhattan are important participants in other global financial centers.[142]:34C35 New York is also the principal commercial banking center of the United States.[144]

Many of the world's largest media conglomerates are also based in the city. Manhattan contained approximately 520 million square feet (48.1 million m2) of office space in 2013,[145] making it the largest office market in the United States,[146] while Midtown Manhattan is the largest central business district in the nation.[147]

Silicon Alley
Main article: Silicon Alley
Silicon Alley, centered in New York City, has evolved into a metonym for the sphere encompassing the New York City metropolitan region's high technology and entrepreneurship ecosystem; in 2015, Silicon Alley generated over US$7.3 billion in venture capital investment.[28] High tech industries including digital media, biotechnology, software development, game design, and other fields in information technology are growing, bolstered by New York City's position at the terminus of several transatlantic fiber optic trunk lines,[148] its intellectual capital, as well as its growing outdoor wireless connectivity.[149] In December 2014, New York State announced a $50 million venture-capital fund to encourage enterprises working in biotechnology and advanced materials; according to Governor Andrew Cuomo, the seed money would facilitate entrepreneurs in bringing their research into the marketplace.[150] On December 19, 2011, then Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg announced his choice of Cornell University and Technion-Israel Institute of Technology to build a US$2 billion graduate school of applied sciences on Roosevelt Island in Manhattan, with the goal of transforming New York City into the world's premier technology capital.[151][152]

Microelectronic hardware, photographic processing, and biotechnology
Main article: Tech Valley
Albany,[153] Saratoga County,[154][155] Rensselaer County, and the Hudson Valley, collectively recognized as eastern New York's Tech Valley, have experienced significant growth in the computer hardware side of the high-technology industry, with great strides in the nanotechnology sector, digital electronics design, and water- and electricity-dependent integrated microchip circuit manufacturing,[154] involving companies including IBM and its Thomas J. Watson Research Center,[156] GlobalFoundries, Samsung, and Taiwan Semiconductor, among others.[153][157] The area's high technology ecosystem is supported by technologically focused academic institutions including Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and the SUNY Polytechnic Institute.[153] In 2015, Tech Valley, straddling both sides of the Adirondack Northway and the New York Thruway, generated over US$163 million in venture capital investment.[28] The Rochester area is important in the field of photographic processing and imaging as well as incubating an increasingly diverse high technology sphere encompassing STEM fields, similarly in part the result of private startup enterprises collaborating with major academic institutions, including the University of Rochester and Cornell University.[158] Westchester County has developed a burgeoning biotechnology sector in the 21st century, with over US$1 billion in planned private investment as of 2016,[159] earning the county the nickname Biochester.[160]

Media and entertainment
Main article: Media in New York City
Creative industries, which are concerned with generating and distributing knowledge and information, such as new media, digital media, film and television production, advertising, fashion, design, and architecture, account for a growing share of employment, with New York City possessing a strong competitive advantage in these industries.[161] As of 2014, New York State was offering tax incentives of up to $420 million annually for filmmaking within the state, the most generous such tax rebate among the U.S. states. New York has also attracted higher-wage visual-effects employment by further augmenting its tax credit to a maximum of 35% for performing post-film production work in Upstate New York.[162] The filmed entertainment industry has been growing in New York, contributing nearly US$9 billion to the New York City economy alone as of 2015.[163]


The I Love New York logo was designed by Milton Glaser in 1977.
Tourism
Main articles: Tourism in New York City, Niagara Falls, and Broadway theatre
I Love New York (stylized I ? NY) is both a logo and a song that are the basis of an advertising campaign and have been used since 1977 to promote tourism in New York City,[164] and later to promote New York State as well. The trademarked logo, owned by New York State Empire State Development,[165] appears in souvenir shops and brochures throughout the state, some licensed, many not. The song is the state song of New York. The Broadway League reported that Broadway shows sold approximately US$1.27 billion worth of tickets in the 2013C2014 season, an 11.4% increase from US$1.139 billion in the 2012C2013 season. Attendance in 2013C2014 stood at 12.21 million, representing a 5.5% increase from the 2012C2013 season's 11.57 million.[166]

Exports
New York exports a wide variety of goods such as prepared foods, computers and electronics, cut diamonds, and other commodities. In 2007, the state exported a total of $71.1 billion worth of goods, with the five largest foreign export markets being Canada (US$15 billion), the United Kingdom (US$6 billion), Switzerland (US$5.9 billion), Israel (US$4.9 billion), and Hong Kong (US$3.4 billion). New York's largest imports are oil, gold, aluminum, natural gas, electricity, rough diamonds, and lumber. The state also has a large manufacturing sector that includes printing and the production of garments, mainly in New York City; and furs, railroad equipment, automobile parts, and bus line vehicles, concentrated in Upstate regions.

New York is the nation's third-largest grape producing state, and second-largest wine producer by volume, behind California. The southern Finger Lakes hillsides, the Hudson Valley, the North Fork of Long Island, and the southern shore of Lake Erie are the primary grape- and wine-growing regions in New York, with many vineyards. In 2012, New York had 320 wineries and 37,000 grape bearing acres, generating full-time employment of nearly 25,000 and annual wages of over US$1.1 billion, and yielding US$4.8 billion in direct economic impact from New York grapes, grape juice, and wine and grape products.[167]

New York is a major agricultural producer overall, ranking among the top five states for agricultural products including maple syrup, apples, cherries, cabbage, dairy products, onions, and potatoes. The state is the largest producer of cabbage in the U.S. The state has about a quarter of its land in farms and produced $3.4 billion in agricultural products in 2001. The south shore of Lake Ontario provides the right mix of soils and microclimate for many apple, cherry, plum, pear and peach orchards. Apples are also grown in the Hudson Valley and near Lake Champlain. A moderately sized saltwater commercial fishery is located along the Atlantic side of Long Island. The principal catches by value are clams, lobsters, squid, and flounder.

Education
Main article: Education in New York (state)

System Administration Building of the State University of New York in Albany
The University of the State of New York oversees all public primary, middle-level, and secondary education in the state, while the New York City Department of Education manages the New York City Public Schools system. In 1894, reflecting general racial discrimination then, the state passed a law that allowed communities to set up separate schools for children of African-American descent. In 1900, the state passed another law requiring integrated schools.[168]

At the level of post-secondary education, the statewide public university system is the State University of New York, commonly referred to as SUNY. New York City also has its own City University of New York system, which is funded by the city. The SUNY system consists of 64 community colleges, technical colleges, undergraduate colleges, and doctoral-granting institutions, including several universities. New York's largest public university is the State University of New York at Buffalo, which was founded by U.S President and Vice President Millard Fillmore.[169][170] The four SUNY University Centers, offering a wide array of academic programs, are the University at Albany, Binghamton University, Stony Brook University, and the University at Buffalo.

Notable large private universities include the Columbia University in Upper Manhattan and Cornell University in Ithaca, both Ivy League institutions, as well as New York University in Lower Manhattan, and Fordham University in the Bronx, Manhattan, and Westchester County. Smaller notable private institutions of higher education include Rockefeller University, New York Institute of Technology, Yeshiva University, and Hofstra University. There are also a multitude of postgraduate-level schools in New York State, including Medical, Law, and Engineering schools. West Point, the service academy of the U.S. Army, is located just south of Newburgh, on the west bank of the Hudson River.

During the fiscal 2013 year, New York spent more on public education per pupil than any other state, according to U.S. Census Bureau statistics.[171]

Transportation
Main article: Transportation in New York
New York State Thruway

The Thaddeus Kosciusko Bridge, crossing the Mohawk River, is the portion of the toll-free, six-lane Adirondack Northway that connects Albany County and Saratoga County.

The New York City Subway is one of the world's busiest, serving a passenger ridership of over 5 million per average weekday.
Five jumbo airplanes wait in a line on a runway next to a small body of water. Behind them in the distance is the airport and control tower.
John F. Kennedy Airport in Queens, the busiest international air passenger gateway to the United States.
New York has one of the most extensive and one of the oldest transportation infrastructures in the country. Engineering challenges posed by the complex terrain of the state and the unique infrastructural issues of New York City brought on by urban crowding have had to be overcome perennially. Population expansion of the state has followed the path of the early waterways, first the Hudson River and Mohawk River, then the Erie Canal. In the 19th century, railroads were constructed along the river valleys, followed by the New York State Thruway in the 20th century.

The New York State Department of Transportation (NYSDOT) is the department of the government of New York[172] responsible for the development and operation of highways, railroads, mass transit systems, ports, waterways, and aviation facilities within New York State. The NYSDOT is headquartered at 50 Wolf Road in Colonie, Albany County. The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey (PANYNJ) is a joint venture between the States of New York and New Jersey and authorized by the US Congress, established in 1921 through an interstate compact, that oversees much of the regional transportation infrastructure, including bridges, tunnels, airports, and seaports, within the geographical jurisdiction of the Port of New York and New Jersey. This 1,500 square mile (3,900 km2) port district is generally encompassed within a 25-mile (40 km) radius of the Statue of Liberty National Monument.[173] The Port Authority is headquartered at 4 World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan.

In addition to the well known New York City Subway system C which is confined within New York City C four suburban commuter railroad systems enter and leave the city: the Long Island Rail Road, Metro-North Railroad, Port Authority Trans-Hudson, and five of New Jersey Transit's rail lines. The New York City Department of Transportation (NYCDOT) is the agency of the government of New York City[174] responsible for the management of much of New York City's own transportation infrastructure. Other cities and towns in New York have urban and regional public transportation. In Buffalo, the Niagara Frontier Transportation Authority runs the Buffalo Metro Rail light-rail system; in Rochester, the Rochester Subway operated from 1927 until 1956, but fell into disuse as state and federal investment went to highways.

The New York State Department of Motor Vehicles (NYSDMV or DMV) is the governmental agency responsible for registering and inspecting automobiles and other motor vehicles, as well as licensing drivers in the State of New York. As of 2008, the NYSDMV has 11,284,546 drivers licenses on file[175] and 10,697,644 vehicle registrations in force.[176] All gasoline-powered vehicles registered in New York State are required to have an emissions inspection every 12 months, in order to ensure that environmental quality controls are working to prevent air pollution. Diesel-powered vehicles with a gross weight rating over 8,500 lb that are registered in most Downstate New York counties must get an annual emissions inspection. All vehicles registered in New York State must get an annual safety inspection.

Portions of the transportation system are intermodal, allowing travelers to switch easily from one mode of transportation to another. One of the most notable examples is AirTrain JFK which allows rail passengers to travel directly to terminals at John F. Kennedy International Airport as well as to the underground New York City Subway system.

Government and politics

The New York State Capitol in Albany
Government
Main article: Government of New York (state)

Andrew Cuomo (D), the 56th and current Governor of New York
The Government of New York embodies the governmental structure of the State of New York as established by the New York State Constitution. It is composed of three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial.

The Governor is the State's chief executive and is assisted by the Lieutenant Governor. Both are elected on the same ticket. Additional elected officers include the Attorney General, and the Comptroller. The Secretary of State, formerly an elected officer, is currently appointed by the Governor.

The New York State Legislature is bicameral and consists of the New York State Senate and the New York State Assembly. The Assembly consists of 150 members, while the Senate varies in its number of members, currently having 63. The Legislature is empowered to make laws, subject to the Governor's power to veto a bill. However, the veto may be overridden by the Legislature if there is a two-thirds majority in favor of overriding in each House. The permanent laws of a general nature are codified in the Consolidated Laws of New York.

The highest court of appeal in the Unified Court System is the Court of Appeals whereas the primary felony trial court is the County Court (or the Supreme Court in New York City). The Supreme Court also acts as the intermediate appellate court for many cases, and the local courts handle a variety of other matters including small claims, traffic ticket cases, and local zoning matters, and are the starting point for all criminal cases. The New York City courts make up the largest local court system.

The state is divided into counties, cities, towns, and villages, all of which are municipal corporations with respect to their own governments, as well as various corporate entities that serve single purposes that are also local governments, such as school districts, fire districts, and New York state public-benefit corporations, frequently known as authorities or development corporations. Each municipal corporation is granted varying home rule powers as provided by the New York Constitution. The state also has 10 Indian reservations.

Capital punishment
Main article: Capital punishment in New York
Capital punishment was reintroduced in 1995 under the Pataki administration, but the statute was declared unconstitutional in 2004, when the New York Court of Appeals ruled in People v. LaValle that it violated the state constitution. The remaining death sentence was commuted by the court to life imprisonment in 2007, in People v. John Taylor, and the death row was disestablished in 2008, under executive order from Governor Paterson. No execution has taken place in New York since 1963. Legislative efforts to amend the statute have failed, and death sentences are no longer sought at the state level, though certain crimes that fall under the jurisdiction of the federal government are subject to the federal death penalty.[177][178][179]

Federal representation
See also: Current United States congressional delegation from New York and New York's congressional districts

Charles Schumer (D), New York's current senior U.S. Senator

Kirsten Gillibrand (D), New York's current junior U.S. Senator

The United Nations Headquarters has been situated on the East Side of Midtown Manhattan since 1952.
The State of New York sends 27 members to the House of Representatives[180] in addition to its two United States Senators. As of the 2000 census and the redistricting for the 2002 elections, the state had 29 members in the House, but the representation was reduced to 27 in 2013 due to the state's slower overall population growth relative to the overall national population growth.[181] From 2016, New York will have 29 electoral votes in national presidential elections (a drop from its peak of 47 votes from 1933 to 1953).

New York is represented by Chuck Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand in the United States Senate and has the nation's third equal highest number of congressional districts, equal with Florida and behind California's 53 and Texas's 36.

The state has a strong imbalance of payments with the federal government. According to the Office of the New York State Comptroller, New York State received 91 cents in services for every $1 it sent in taxes to the U.S. federal government in the 2013 fiscal year; New York ranked in 46th place in the federal balance of payments to the state on a per capita basis.[182]

Politics
Main articles: Elections in New York, Political party strength in New York, Politics of New York (state), and Law of New York
As of April 2016, Democrats represented a plurality of voters in New York State, constituting over twice as many registered voters as any other political party affiliation or lack thereof.[183] Since the second half of the 20th century, New York has generally supported candidates belonging to the Democratic Party in national elections. Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama won New York State by over 25 percentage points in both 2012 and 2008. New York City, as well as the state's other major urban locales, including Albany, Buffalo, Rochester, Yonkers, and Syracuse, are significant Democratic strongholds, with liberal politics. Rural portions of upstate New York, however, are generally more conservative than the cities and tend to favor Republicans. Heavily populated suburban areas downstate, such as Westchester County and Long Island, have swung between the major parties since the 1980s, but more often than not support Democrats.

New York City is the most important source of political fundraising in the United States for both major parties. Four of the top five zip codes in the nation for political contributions are in Manhattan. The top zip code, 10021 on the Upper East Side, generated the most money for the 2000 presidential campaigns of both George W. Bush and Al Gore.[184]

New York City is an important center for international diplomacy.[185] The United Nations Headquarters has been situated on the East Side of Midtown Manhattan since 1952.

New York State Presidential Election Results
Year	Democratic	Republican
2012	63.35%	4,485,877	35.17%	2,490,496
2008	62.88%	4,804,945	36.03%	2,752,771
2004	58.37%	4,314,280	40.08%	2,962,567
2000	60.21%	4,107,907	35.23%	2,403,374
1996	59.47%	3,756,177	30.61%	1,933,492
1992	49.73%	3,444,450	33.88%	2,346,649
1988	51.62%	3,347,882	47.52%	3,081,871
1984	45.83%	3,119,609	53.84%	3,664,763
1980	43.99%	2,728,372	46.66%	2,893,831
1976	51.95%	3,389,558	47.52%	3,100,791
1972	41.21%	2,951,084	58.54%	4,192,778
1968	49.76%	3,378,470	44.30%	3,007,932
1964	68.56%	4,913,156	31.31%	2,243,559
1960	52.53%	3,830,085	47.27%	3,446,419
New York registered voters as of April 1, 2016[183]
Party	Number of Voters	Percentage
 	Democratic	5,792,497	49.4%
 	Republican	2,731,688	23.29%
 	Unaffiliated	2,485,475	21.19%
Independence	475,566	4.06%
Conservative	159,355	1.36%
Working Families	48,344	0.41%
 	Green	26,271	0.22%
 	Women's Equality	1,283	0.01%
 	Reform	377	0.003%
Other	5,986	0.05%
Total	11,726,842	100%

Arthur Ashe Stadium, site of the US Open tennis championships, in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
Sports


Belmont Park on Long Island, at top, hosts the Belmont Stakes, the final leg of the Triple Crown of thoroughbred horse racing; below is the National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame in Saratoga Springs, Saratoga County, which honors achievements in this sport.

Sunset on Lake Champlain in the Champlain Valley, at the base of the Adirondack Mountains. This lake straddles New York, Vermont, and Quebec, and is popular with nature observers as well as water sportsmen.
Main article: Sports in New York
New York State is geographically home to one National Football League team, the Buffalo Bills, based in the Buffalo suburb of Orchard Park. Although the New York Giants and New York Jets represent the New York metropolitan area and were previously located in New York City, they play in MetLife Stadium, located in East Rutherford, New Jersey. New York also has two Major League Baseball teams, the New York Yankees (based in the Bronx) and the New York Mets (based in Queens). Minor league baseball teams also play in the State of New York, including the Long Island Ducks. New York is home to three National Hockey League franchises: the New York Rangers in Manhattan, the New York Islanders in Brooklyn, and the Buffalo Sabres in Buffalo. New York has two National Basketball Association teams, the New York Knicks in Manhattan, and the Brooklyn Nets in Brooklyn. New York is the home of a Major League Soccer franchise, New York City FC, currently playing in the Bronx. Although the New York Red Bulls represent the New York metropolitan area, they play in Red Bull Arena in Harrison, New Jersey.

New York hosted the 1932 and 1980 Winter Olympics at Lake Placid. The 1980 Games are known for the USACUSSR ice hockey match dubbed the "Miracle on Ice", in which a group of American college students and amateurs defeated the heavily favored Soviet national ice hockey team 4C3 and went on to win the gold medal against Finland. Along with St. Moritz, Switzerland and Innsbruck, Austria, Lake Placid is one of the three cities to have hosted the Winter Olympic Games twice. New York City bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics but lost to London.

Several U.S. national sports halls of fame are or have been situated in New York. The National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum is located in Cooperstown, Otsego County. The National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame in Saratoga Springs, Saratoga County, honors achievements in the sport of thoroughbred horse racing. The physical facility of the National Soccer Hall of Fame in Oneonta, also in Otsego County, closed in 2010, although the organization itself has continued inductions. The annual United States Open Tennis Championships is one of the world's four Grand Slam tennis tournaments and is held at the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in the New York City borough of Queens.[186]

New York State major league professional sports teams
Club	Sport	League
Buffalo Bills	Football	National Football League
Brooklyn Nets	Basketball	National Basketball Association
New York Knicks	Basketball	National Basketball Association
New York City FC	Soccer	Major League Soccer
Buffalo Sabres	Ice hockey	National Hockey League
New York Islanders	Ice Hockey	National Hockey League
New York Rangers	Ice Hockey	National Hockey League
New York Mets	Baseball	Major League Baseball
New York Yankees	Baseball	Major League Baseball
See also
	New York portal
	United States portal
Index of New York-related articles
Outline of New York C organized list of topics about New York
References
^ "New York State Motto". New York State Library. January 29, 2001. Archived from the original on June 8, 2007. Retrieved November 16, 2007.
^ "Language spoken at home by ability to speak English for the population 5 years and over - 2014 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates". Retrieved January 24, 2016.
^ a b "Land and Water Area of States (2000)". Infoplease.com. Retrieved April 11, 2008.
^ a b c d "Table 1. Annual Estimates of the Resident Population for the United States, Regions, States, and Puerto Rico: April 1, 2010 to July 1, 2015" (CSV). U.S. Census Bureau. December 23, 2015. Retrieved December 23, 2015.
^ "Marcy". NGS data sheet. U.S. National Geodetic Survey. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ a b "Elevations and Distances in the United States". United States Geological Survey. 2001. Archived from the original on February 1, 2009. Retrieved October 24, 2011.
^ a b Elevation adjusted to North American Vertical Datum of 1988.
^ a b c d e f "Annual Estimates of the Resident Population: April 1, 2010 to July 1, 2015 - 2015 Population Estimates". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved March 24, 2016.
^ "Supplemental Table 2. Persons Obtaining Lawful Permanent Resident Status by Leading Core Based Statistical Areas (CBSAs) of Residence and Region and Country of Birth: Fiscal Year 2014". U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved June 1, 2016.
^ a b "Yearbook of Immigration Statistics: 2013 Supplemental Table 2". U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved May 29, 2015.
^ a b "Yearbook of Immigration Statistics: 2012 Supplemental Table 2". U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved May 29, 2015.
^ "World's Largest Urban Areas [Ranked by Urban Area Population]". Rhett Butler. 2003C2006. Retrieved August 2, 2014.
^ "Largest Cities of the World C (by metro population)". Woolwine-Moen Group d/b/a Graphic Maps. Retrieved August 2, 2014.
^ "Global power city index 2009" (PDF). The Mori Memorial Foundation. Retrieved August 2, 2014.
^ Shira Poliak. "Adjusting To New York City". Sun Sentinel. Retrieved January 9, 2016. Additionally, the fast-paced lifestyle of New York City demands adjusting.
^ "Dictionary - Full Definition of NEW YORK MINUTE". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved November 7, 2015.
^ "United Nations Visitors Centre". United Nations. 2011. Archived from the original on September 24, 2010. Retrieved August 2, 2014.
^ "Office of the Mayor Commission for the United Nations, Consular Corps and Protocol". The City of New York. 2012. Retrieved August 2, 2014.
^ "Consulate General of Iceland New York Culture". Consulate General of Iceland New York. Retrieved August 2, 2014.
^ "Consulate of Latvia in New York". Consulate of Latvia. Retrieved February 17, 2013.
^ "Introduction to Chapter 14: New York City (NYC) Culture". The Weissman Center for International Business Baruch College/CUNY 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2014.
^ "New York, Culture Capital of the World, 1940C1965 / edited by Leonard Wallock ; essays by Dore Ashton ... [et al.]". NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA. Retrieved August 2, 2014.
^ a b c "Top 8 Cities by GDP: China vs. The U.S.". Business Insider, Inc. July 31, 2011. Retrieved October 28, 2015. For instance, Shanghai, the largest Chinese city with the highest economic production, and a fast-growing global financial hub, is far from matching or surpassing New York, the largest city in the U.S. and the economic and financial super center of the world.
"PAL sets introductory fares to New York". Philippine Airlines. Retrieved March 25, 2015.
^ a b Richard Florida (March 3, 2015). "Sorry, London: New York Is the World's Most Economically Powerful City". The Atlantic Monthly Group. Retrieved March 25, 2015. Our new ranking puts the Big Apple firmly on top.
^ Richard Florida (May 8, 2012). "What Is the World's Most Economically Powerful City?". The Atlantic Monthly Group. Retrieved March 25, 2015.
^ Ann Shields (November 10, 2014). "The World's 50 Most Visited Tourist Attractions C No. 3: Times Square, New York City C Annual Visitors: 50,000,000". Travel+Lesiure. Retrieved July 17, 2015. No. 3 Times Square, New York City - Annual Visitors: 50,000,000...No. 4 (tie) Central Park, New York City - Annual Visitors: 40,000,000...No. 9: Niagara Falls, New York and Ontario - Annual Visitors: 22,000,000...No. 10 Grand Central Terminal, New York City - Annual Visitors: 21,600,000
^ "Statue of Liberty". World Heritage. UNESCO. Retrieved July 17, 2015.
^ a b c "Venture Investment - Regional Aggregate Data". National Venture Capital Association and PricewaterhouseCoopers. Retrieved April 22, 2016.
^ Matt Flegenheimer (March 23, 2016). "Ted Cruz Deplores 'Liberal, Left-Wing Values' While Lobbying for New York Votes". The New York Times. Retrieved April 22, 2016.
^ The Associated Press (April 22, 2016). "The Latest: China Hopes US Joins Climate Deal Quickly". The New York Times. Retrieved April 22, 2016.
^ Lisa Foderaro (September 21, 2014). "Taking a Call for Climate Change to the Streets". The New York Times. Retrieved April 22, 2016.
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2015". ShanghaiRanking Consultancy. Retrieved August 27, 2015.
^ "CWUR 2015 - World University Rankings". Center for World University Rankings. Retrieved August 27, 2015.
^ Centro Studi Storici Verrazzano
^ "Castle Island".
^ Reynolds, Cuyler (1906). Albany Chronicles: A History of the City Arranged Chronologically. J.B. Lyon Company.
^ Nevius, Michelle and James, "New York's many 9/11 anniversaries: the Staten Island Peace Conference", Inside the Apple: A Streetwise History of New York City, September 8, 2008. Retrieved September 24, 2012.
^ Scheltema, Gajus and Westerhuijs, Heleen (eds.),Exploring Historic Dutch New York. Museum of the City of New York/Dover Publications, New York (2011). ISBN 978-0-486-48637-6
^ "Declaration of Independence". history.com. Archived from the original on April 9, 2008. Retrieved April 10, 2008.
^ Alan Taylor (2006). The Divided Ground: Indians, Settlers, and the Northern Borderland of the American Revolution. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-679-45471-7.
^ "Sullivan/Clinton Interactive Map Set". Retrieved August 30, 2010.
^ Chen, David W. Battle Over Iroquois Land Claims Escalates The New York Times. May 16, 2000. . Retrieved April 11, 2008.
^ "Happy Evacuation Day". New York City Department of Parks and Recreation. Retrieved April 12, 2008.
^ "New York's Ratification". The U.S. Constitution Online. Retrieved April 10, 2008.
^ "The Erie Canal: A Brief History". New York State Canals. Archived from the original on January 24, 2010. Retrieved April 10, 2008.
^ Peter L. Bernstein, Wedding of the waters: The Erie Canal and the making of a great nation (2005).
^ Robert Greenhalgh Albion, The rise of New York port (1815-1860) (1939).
^ Ernest A. McKay, The Civil War and New York City (1990).
^ Frederick Phisterer, New York in the War of the Rebellion, 1861 To 1865 (1890), p. 88.
^ "Castle Garden as An Immigrant Depot:1855C1890" (PDF). National Park Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 10, 2013. Retrieved September 9, 2013.
^ "Castle Clinton". National Park Service. August 22, 2013. Retrieved September 9, 2013.
^ Vincent J. Cannato: American Passage: The History of Ellis Island. p.50: Harper Collins (2009) ISBN 0060742739
^ Linda Greenhouse (May 27, 1998). "The Ellis Island Verdict: The Ruling". The New York Times. Retrieved September 5, 2013.
^ "Statue Of Liberty National Monument". Nps.gov. Retrieved September 9, 2013.
^ Edelman, Susan (January 6, 2008). "Charting post-9/11 deaths". Retrieved January 22, 2012.
^ Katia Hetter (November 12, 2013). "It's official: One World Trade Center to be tallest U.S. skyscraper". CNN. Retrieved November 12, 2013.
^ Mary Johnson (October 29, 2012). "VIDEO: Dramatic Explosion at East Village Con Ed Plant". Copyright ? 2009C2012, DNAinfo.com. All Rights Reserved. Retrieved December 2, 2012.
^ Jeff Stone & Maria Gallucci (October 29, 2014). "Hurricane Sandy Anniversary 2014: Fortifying New York -- How Well Armored Are We For The Next Superstorm?". International Business Times. Retrieved July 23, 2015.
^ Robert S. Eshelman (November 15, 2012). "ADAPTATION: Political support for a sea wall in New York Harbor begins to form". E&E Publishing, LLC. Retrieved July 23, 2015.
^ "Elevations and Distances in the United States". U.S Geological Survey. April 29, 2005. Archived from the original on February 1, 2009. Retrieved November 6, 2006.
^ About the Adirondack Park, Adirondack Park Agency. Retrieved July 1, 2009.
^ Eisenstadt, Peter, ed. (2005). The Encyclopedia of New York State. Syracuse University Press. p. 1619. ISBN 978-0-8156-0808-0.
^ Eisenstadt, Peter, ed. (2005). The Encyclopedia of New York State. Syracuse University Press. p. 1437. ISBN 978-0-8156-0808-0.
^ Eisenstadt, Peter, ed. (2005). The Encyclopedia of New York State. Syracuse University Press. ISBN 978-0-8156-0808-0.
^ "Climate of New York". New York State Climate Office C Cornell University. Archived from the original on April 12, 2008. Retrieved April 10, 2008.
^ The New York Post (June 3, 2007). "A Breath of Fresh New York Air". Archived from the original on June 6, 2007. Retrieved June 6, 2007.
^ "Typical high and low temperatures for New York Cities". US Travel Weather. Retrieved March 24, 2010.
^ "Age/sex/race in New York State: Based on Census 2010" (PDF). Retrieved May 15, 2012.
^ "Map of eleven regions". Visitnewyorkstate.net. Retrieved October 2, 2010.
^ a b Largest Park Area in the Contiguous US Remains Open to Visitors, Thursday, October 3, 2013. Regional Office of Sustainable Tourism / Lake Placid CVB. Retrieved July 26, 2014.
^ a b "Catskill Park History". catskillpark.org. Archived from the original on July 5, 2008. Retrieved April 11, 2008.
^ "The Catskill Region". catskillmtn.org. Retrieved September 15, 2014.
^ "Statue of Liberty". World Heritage. UNESCO. Retrieved November 24, 2013.
^ African Burial Ground, General Services Administration, accessed February 10, 2012
^ Eli Rosenberg (June 24, 2016). "Stonewall Inn Named National Monument, a First for the Gay Rights Movement". The New York Times. Retrieved July 4, 2016.
^ "Workforce Diversity The Stonewall Inn, National Historic Landmark National Register Number: 99000562". National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior. Retrieved July 4, 2016.
^ Hayasaki, Erika (May 18, 2007). "A new generation in the West Village". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 4, 2016.
^ "New York State Thruway". thruway.ny.gov. New York State Thruway Authority. Archived from the original on August 22, 2014. Retrieved September 15, 2014.
^ "New York: 2000 (Population and Housing Unit Counts)" (PDF). 2000 United States Census. United States Census Bureau. 2000. Retrieved September 18, 2010. (page 1 of the document, page 31 of the file)
^ "Annual Estimates of the Resident Population for Incorporated Places of 50,000 or More, Ranked by July 1, 2014 Population: April 1, 2010 to July 1, 2014 - United States -- Places of 50,000+ Population - 2014 Population Estimates". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved October 29, 2015.
^ "Domestic Migration Flows for States from the 2005 ACS" (Microsoft Word). Retrieved October 19, 2007.[dead link]
^ Timothy S. Parker (September 10, 2010). "New York Fact Sheet: NY agriculture income population food education employment farms top commodities exports counties financial indicators poverty organic farming farm income America USDA". Ers.usda.gov. Retrieved October 2, 2010.
^ Blake Ellis (March 25, 2011). "America's 5 biggest cities". CNN. Retrieved November 12, 2013.
^ Roberts, Sam (March 14, 2013). "Fewer People Are Abandoning the Bronx, Census Data Show". New York Times.
^ "State & County QuickFacts Los Angeles (city), California". U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved July 9, 2015.
^ "Kings County, New York QuickFacts". U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved March 24, 2016.
^ "Queens County, New York QuickFacts". U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved March 24, 2016.
^ "Nassau County, New York QuickFacts". U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved March 24, 2016.
^ "Suffolk County, New York QuickFacts". U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved March 24, 2016.
^ "State & County QuickFacts New York". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved November 14, 2013.
^ "2010 Census National Summary File of Redistricting Data C Population and Housing Occupancy Status: 2010 C United States C Metropolitan Statistical Area; and for Puerto Rico". 2010 United States Census. United States Census Bureau, Population Division. April 14, 2011. Retrieved March 14, 2012.
^ Lawrence A. McGlinn, Department of Geography SUNY-New Paltz. "Beyond Chinatown: Dual immigration and the Chinese population of metropolitan New York City, 2000, Page 4" (PDF). Middle States Geographer, 2002, 35: 110C119, Journal of the Middle States Division of the Association of American Geographers. Retrieved June 28, 2015.
^ "Chinatown New York City Fact Sheet" (PDF). www.explorechinatown.com. Retrieved June 28, 2015.
^ Sarah Waxman. "The History of New York's Chinatown". Mediabridge Infosystems, Inc. Retrieved June 28, 2015.
^ a b c "Yearbook of Immigration Statistics: 2013 Supplemental Table 1". U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved May 29, 2015.
^ a b "Yearbook of Immigration Statistics: 2012 Supplemental Table 1". U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved May 29, 2015.
^ a b c "New York QuickFacts". U.S. Census Bureau. January 17, 2012. Retrieved April 18, 2012.
^ a b c d "Historical Census Statistics on Population Totals By Race, 1790 to 1990, and By Hispanic Origin, 1970 to 1990, For The United States, Regions, Divisions, and States".[dead link]
^ Population of New York: Census 2010 and 2000 Interactive Map, Demographics, Statistics, Quick Facts[dead link]
^ Center for New Media and Promotions(C2PO). "2010 Census Data". census.gov.
^ Awesome America: New York. Retrieved August 18, 2007.
^ "Americans under age 1 now mostly minorities, but not in Ohio: Statistical Snapshot". The Plain Dealer. June 3, 2012.
^ Thomas Kaplan & Jason Horowitz (August 13, 2014). "Cuomo, Visiting Israel, Joins Growing U.S. List". The New York Times. Retrieved September 28, 2014.
^ "Jewish Population in the United States, by State". American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise. Retrieved November 11, 2013.
^ David Brooks (March 7, 2013). "The Orthodox Surge". The New York Times. Retrieved November 11, 2013.
^ a b "State & County QuickFacts - New York QuickLinks". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved September 13, 2015.
^ Dan Bilefsky (June 21, 2011). "For New Life, Blacks in City Head to South". The New York Times. Retrieved September 13, 2015.
^ Christine Kim; Demand Media. "Queens, New York, Sightseeing". USA Today. Retrieved July 19, 2014.
^ Andrew Weber (April 30, 2013). "Queens". NewYork.com. Retrieved July 19, 2014.
^ "Profile of General Population and Housing Characteristics: 2010 Demographic Profile Data". U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved October 3, 2015.
^ "Profile of General Demographic Characteristics: Census 2000 Summary File 1 (SF 1) 100-Percent Data". U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved October 3, 2015.
^ "State & County QuickFacts Nassau County, New York QuickLinks". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved November 14, 2013.
^ Heng Shao (April 10, 2014). "Join The Great Gatsby: Chinese Real Estate Buyers Fan Out To Long Island's North Shore". Forbes. Retrieved August 2, 2014.
^ "Yearbook of Immigration Statistics: 2011 Supplemental Table 1". U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved November 10, 2013.
^ "Yearbook of Immigration Statistics: 2010 Supplemental Table 1". U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved November 10, 2013.
^ John Marzulli (May 9, 2011). "Malaysian man smuggled illegal Chinese immigrants into Brooklyn using Queen Mary 2: authorities". The New York Daily News. Retrieved November 10, 2013.
^ "China City of America Becoming Reality in Catskills". China City of America. Retrieved November 2, 2015.
^ "Endangered Language Alliance". 2012. Retrieved November 11, 2013.
^ "Linguistics- Say what?". The Economist. September 10, 2011. Retrieved November 11, 2013.
^ N. R. Kleinfield (January 15, 2016). "New Yorkers, Self-Assured and Opinionated, Defend Their Values". The New York Times on MSN. Retrieved January 15, 2016.
^ Roberts, Sam (April 28, 2010). "Listening to (and Saving) the World's Languages". The New York Times. Retrieved November 11, 2013.
^ a b "New York". Modern Language Association. Retrieved August 6, 2013.
^ "The Association of Religion Data Archives | State Membership Report". www.thearda.com. Retrieved November 27, 2013.
^ Simone Weichselbaum (June 26, 2012). "Nearly one in four Brooklyn residents are Jews, new study finds". New York Daily News. Retrieved January 9, 2016.
^ "Largest Indoor Buddha in the Western Hemisphere". RoadsideAmerica.com. Retrieved October 27, 2015.
^ "LGBT Percentage Highest in D.C., Lowest in North Dakota". State of the States. Gallup Politics. February 15, 2013.
^ Williams Inst. Census Snapshot http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/category/research/census-lbgt-demographics-studies/
^ "NYC Same-Sex Marriages Generate $259 Million in Economic Impact". New York City Mayor Bloomberg, retrieved November 26, 2013
^ Nicholas Confessore & Michael Barbaro (June 24, 2011). "New York Allows Same-Sex Marriage, Becoming Largest State to Pass Law". The New York Times. Retrieved November 11, 2013.
^ Jennifer Fermino (March 7, 2016). "De Blasio: NYC toilets won't discriminate by gender identity". New York Daily News. Retrieved March 26, 2016.
^ a b "2013 WFE Market Highlights" (PDF). World Federation of Exchanges. Retrieved July 20, 2014.
^ "Gross Metropolitan Product (GMP) of the United States in 2013, by metropolitan area (in billion current U.S. dollars)". Statista. Retrieved September 12, 2014.
^ "Revised Delineations of Metropolitan Statistical Areas, Micropolitan Statistical Areas, and Combined Statistical Areas, and Guidance on Uses of the Delineations of These Areas" (PDF). Executive Office of the President C Office of Management and Budget. p. 106. Retrieved June 28, 2015.
^ "U.S. Metro Economies (note CSA 2012 GMP total includes sum of New York, Bridgeport, New Haven, Allentown, Trenton, Poughkeepsie, and Kingston MSA 2012 GMP values cited)" (PDF). IHS Global Insight, The United States Conference of Mayors, and The Council on Metro Economies and the New American City. November 2013. pp. 9 through 18 in Appendix Tables. Retrieved June 28, 2015.
^ John Glover (November 23, 2014). "New York Boosts Lead on London as Leading Finance Center". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved March 25, 2015.
^ "UBS may move US investment bank to NYC". e-Eighteen.com Ltd. June 10, 2011. Retrieved March 25, 2015.
^ "The Global Financial Centres Index 17" (PDF). Long Finance. March 23, 2015. Retrieved March 25, 2015.
^ "NYSE Listings Directory". Retrieved March 25, 2015.
^ Ambereen Choudhury, Elisa Martinuzzi & Ben Moshinsky (November 26, 2012). "London Bankers Bracing for Leaner Bonuses Than New York". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved July 20, 2014.
^ Sanat Vallikappen (November 10, 2013). "Pay Raises for Bank Risk Officers in Asia Trump New York". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved July 20, 2014.
^ "DiNapoli: Wall Street Bonuses Edge Up in 2014". Office of the New York State Comptroller. March 11, 2015. Retrieved July 15, 2015.
^ a b McKinsey & Company and the New York City Economic Development Corporation. "Sustaining New York's and the US' Global Financial Services Leadership" (PDF). City of New York. Retrieved July 19, 2015.
^ "Total debt securities" (PDF). Bank for International Settlements. June 2013. Retrieved July 19, 2015.
^ Saabira Chaudhuri (September 15, 2014). "Ranking the Biggest U.S. Banks: A New Entrant in Top 5". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved July 19, 2015.
^ "What is an office condominium?". Rudder Property Group. Retrieved May 28, 2013.
^ "Understanding The Manhattan Office Space Market". Officespaceseeker.com. Retrieved July 20, 2014.
^ "Marketbeat United States CBD Office Report 2Q11" (PDF). Cushman & Wakefield, Inc. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 8, 2013. Retrieved July 20, 2014.
^ "Telecommunications and Economic Development in New York City: A Plan for Action" (PDF). New York City Economic Development Corporation. March 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 7, 2008. Retrieved July 19, 2006.
^ Ivan Pereira (December 10, 2013). "City opens nation's largest continuous Wi-Fi zone in Harlem". amNewYork/Newsday. Retrieved February 11, 2014.[dead link]
^ Freeman Klopott (December 12, 2014). "New York State Will Start $50 Million Venture-Capital Fund". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved August 26, 2015.
^ RICHARD PREZ-PE?A (December 19, 2011). "Cornell Alumnus Is Behind $350 Million Gift to Build Science School in City". The New York Times. Retrieved August 1, 2014.
^ Ju, Anne (December 19, 2011). "'Game-changing' Tech Campus Goes to Cornell, Technion". Cornell University. Retrieved August 26, 2015.
^ a b c Larry Rulison (July 10, 2015). "Made in Albany: IBM reveals breakthrough chip made at SUNY Poly". Albany Times-Union. Retrieved July 12, 2015.
^ a b Keshia Clukey (June 27, 2014). "Better than advertised: Chip plant beats expectations". Albany Business Review. Retrieved July 20, 2015.
^ "Fab 8 Overview". GLOBALFOUNDRIES Inc. Retrieved July 12, 2015.
^ John Markoff (October 1, 2015). "IBM Scientists Find New Way to Shrink Transistors". The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2015.
^ Freeman Klopott; Xu Wang & Niamh Ring (September 27, 2011). "IBM, Intel Start $4.4 Billion in Chip Venture in New York". 2011 Bloomberg. Retrieved July 12, 2015.
^ "High Tech Rochester adds 4 businesses". Rochester Democrat and Chronicle. November 7, 2013. Retrieved August 26, 2015.
^ John Jordan (January 2016). "$1.2 Billion Project Could Make Westchester a Biotech Destination". Hudson Gateway Association of Realtors. Retrieved April 9, 2016.
^ Steve Ditlea. "Westchesters Unexpected Powerhouse Position In the Biotech Industry - Four years after our initial look at Westchester's biotech industry, the sector has gone from fledgling to behemoth.". Today Media. Retrieved April 7, 2016. All around, there are signs of a Biochester bloom:
^ Currid, Elizabeth (2006). "New York as a Global Creative Hub: A Competitive Analysis of Four Theories on World Cities". Economic Development Quarterly 20 (4): 330C350. doi:10.1177/0891242406292708.
^ Richard Verrier & Steven Zeitchik (May 4, 2014). "New York taking a larger bite out of Hollywood productions". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 15, 2015.
^ "Mayor De Blasio Announces Increased Growth of New York City's Entertainment Industry Brings $8.7 billion into the Local Economy". City of New York Mayor's Office of Media and Entertainment. October 15, 2015. Retrieved April 10, 2016.
^ Interview with Milton Glaser, The Believer
^ "I Love New York Logo". New York State Education Department. September 26, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2014.
^ "Broadway Calendar-Year Statistics". The Broadway League. Retrieved July 20, 2014.
^ "Welcome to New York Wine Country!". New York Wine & Grape Foundation. Retrieved July 20, 2015.
^ Martha A. Sandweiss, Passing Strange: A Gilded Age Tale of Love and Deception Across the Color Line, New York: Penguin Press, 2009, p. 213
^ "SUNY Buffalo: Complete Campus List". Suny.edu. Retrieved 2016-06-20.
^ "Chancellors and Presidents of the University". University of Buffalo, The State University of New York. Retrieved 2016-06-20.
^ "Education Spending Per Student by State". Governing. Retrieved July 15, 2015.
^ Transportation Law  11. "There shall be in the state government a department of transportation. The head of the department shall be the commissioner of transportation, [...]" Accessed July 19, 2015.
^ "2002 Annual Report" (PDF). PANY. 2003.. Accessed July 19, 2015.
^ New York City Charter  2901; "There shall be a department of transportation, the head of which shall be the commissioner of transportation." Accessed July 19, 2015.
^ "NYS DMV C Statistics C NYS Driver Licenses on File C 2008". New York State Department of Motor Vehicles. Archived from the original on October 11, 2010. Retrieved July 2, 2010.
^ "NYS DMV C Statistics C Vehicle Registrations in Force C 2008". New York State Department of Motor Vehicles. Archived from the original on October 11, 2010. Retrieved July 2, 2010.
^ Rob Gallagher (October 25, 2005). "New York Executions". Archived from the original on May 28, 2008. Retrieved April 9, 2009.
^ Scott, Brendan (July 24, 2008). "Gov Pulls Switch on Death Cell". New York Post. Retrieved April 9, 2009.
^ Powell, Michael (April 13, 2005). "In N.Y., Lawmakers Vote Not to Reinstate Capital Punishment". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 11, 2008.
^ "Directory of Representatives". House.gov. Retrieved March 15, 2014.
^ Rey, Jay pubdate=Dec 22, 2010. "N.Y.'s slow growth will mean loss of two seats in House". The Buffalo News. Archived from the original on May 16, 2012. Retrieved December 22, 2010.
^ Thomas P. DiNapoli, State Comptroller (October 2015). "New York's Balance of Payments in the Federal Budget - Federal Fiscal Year 2013" (PDF). Office of the New York State Comptroller. Retrieved April 27, 2016.
^ a b NYSVoter Enrollment by County, Party Affiliation and Status Accessed April 30, 2016.
^ Opensecrets.org (May 16, 2005). "2006 Election Overview: Top Zip codes". Retrieved July 19, 2006.
^ "NYC Mayor's Office for International Affairs". The City of New York. Retrieved June 24, 2015.
^ "US Open 2015". United States Tennis Association. Retrieved July 6, 2015.
Further reading
Main article: Bibliography of New York
French, John Homer (1860). Historical and statistical gazetteer of New York State. Syracuse, New York: R. Pearsall Smith. OCLC 224691273.(Full text via Google Books.)
New York State Historical Association (1940). New York: A Guide to the Empire State. New York City: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-1-60354-031-5. OCLC 504264143.(Full text via Google Books.)
External links
New York at DMOZ
 Geographic data related to New York at OpenStreetMap
v t e
 State of New York
Albany (capital)
Topics	
Bibliography Demographics Economy Education Geography History Healthcare Museums Music Nickname People Politics Sports Symbols Transportation Visitor attractions
Politics	
Administrative divisions Congressional districts Constitution Elections Government Law
Regions	
Adirondack Mountains Allegheny Plateau Capital District Catskill Mountains Central Region (formerly Central-Leatherstocking) Central New York Champlain Valley New York City Finger Lakes Holland Purchase Hudson Highlands Hudson Valley Long Island Mohawk Valley Niagara Frontier North Country Ridge and Valley Saint Lawrence Seaway Shawangunks Ski country Southern Tier Southtowns Tech Valley Thousand Islands Tug Hill Upstate Western
Metro areas	
Albany / Schenectady / Troy Binghamton Buffalo / Niagara Falls Elmira / Corning Glens Falls Ithaca Kingston New York City Rochester Syracuse Utica / Rome Watertown
Counties	
Albany Allegany Bronx Broome Cattaraugus Cayuga Chautauqua Chemung Chenango Clinton Columbia Cortland Delaware Dutchess Erie Essex Franklin Fulton Genesee Greene Hamilton Herkimer Jefferson Kings Lewis Livingston Madison Monroe Montgomery Nassau New York Niagara Oneida Onondaga Ontario Orange Orleans Oswego Otsego Putnam Queens Rensselaer Richmond Rockland Saint Lawrence Saratoga Schenectady Schoharie Schuyler Seneca Steuben Suffolk Sullivan Tioga Tompkins Ulster Warren Washington Wayne Westchester Wyoming Yates
Places	
Cities Towns Indian reservations Villages Census-designated places
v t e
Northeastern United States
Topics	
Culture Geography Government History
States	
Connecticut Delaware District of Columbia Maryland Massachusetts New Hampshire New Jersey New York Maine Pennsylvania Rhode Island Vermont
Major cities	
Allentown Baltimore Boston Bridgeport Buffalo Burlington Cambridge Elizabeth Erie Hartford Jersey City Lowell Manchester New Haven New York Newark Paterson Philadelphia Portland Providence Quincy Reading Rochester Scranton Springfield Stamford Syracuse Washington, D.C. Waterbury Wilmington Worcester
State capitals	
Albany Annapolis Augusta Boston Concord Dover Hartford Harrisburg Montpelier Providence Trenton
v t e
Political divisions of the United States
States	
Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming
Federal district	
Washington, D.C.
Insular areas	
American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands
Outlying islands	
Baker Island Howland Island Jarvis Island Johnston Atoll Kingman Reef Midway Atoll Navassa Island Palmyra Atoll Wake Island
Indian reservations	
List of Indian reservations largest
Associated states	
Federated States of Micronesia Marshall Islands Palau
Find out more on Wikipedia's
Sister projects	
	Media
from Commons
	Travel guides
from Wikivoyage
	News stories
from Wikinews
	Definitions
from Wiktionary
	Textbooks
from Wikibooks
	Quotations
from Wikiquote
	Source texts
from Wikisource
	Data
from Wikidata
Coordinates: 43N 75W

Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 146785329 GND: 4042012-7 SUDOC: 026581000 BNF: cb118801040 (data) NDL: 00628913
Categories: Former British coloniesNew YorkStates of the United StatesStates of the Mid-AtlanticNortheastern United StatesStates of the East Coast of the United States1788 establishments in the United StatesStates and territories established in 1788
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch

Search
SearchGo
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikinews
Wikivoyage
Languages
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
????
?nglisc
???????
Aragons
?????
Arpetan
Asturianu
Ava?e'?
Aymar aru
Az?rbaycanca
?????
Ban-lam-g
?

 (?)?
???????
Bikol Central
Bislama

Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg

Catal
?
Cebuano
?e?tina
Chavacano de Zamboanga
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Din bizaad
Eesti
?
Espa?ol
Esperanto
Euskara
?????
Fiji Hindi
F?royskt
Fran?ais
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gagauz
Gidhlig
Galego
Z/Hak-ka-ng?

???
Hawai?i
???????
??????
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Igbo
Ilokano
????????????? ???????
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
??????/inuktitut
I?upiak

IsiZulu
slenska
Italiano
?????
Basa Jawa
?????
Kapampangan
???????
Kasz?bsczi
??
Kernowek
Kiswahili
Kreyl ayisyen
Kurd?
 
Ladino
???
???? ??????
Latina
Latvie?u
L?tzebuergesch
Lietuvi?
Ligure
Limburgs
La .lojban.
Lumbaart
Magyar

??????
Mori
?????
?????????
????
????????
Bahasa Melayu
Mng-d??ng-ng??

??????????
Nhuatl
Nederlands
??????
????? ????
Z

Nordfriisk
Norsk bokm?l
Norsk nynorsk
Occitan
 
?????
O?zbekcha/?
??????
????
P?lzisch
??????
Papiamentu
????
?????????
Piemontis
Plattdtsch
Polski
Portugus
Qaraqalpaqsha
Roman?
Rumantsch
Runa Simi

 
Smegiella
Gagana Samoa
?????????
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Shqip
Sicilianu
?????
Simple English
????
Sloven?ina
Sloven??ina
?l?nski
?????? ???????
 / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / 
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
?????
Taqbaylit
/tatar?a
??????
???
??
???
Trk?e
Trkmen?e
?
????
???????? / Uyghurche
Vneto
Ti?ng Vi?t
Volapk
West-Vlams
Winaray

??????
Yorb
Z
?emait??ka

Edit links
This page was last modified on 29 July 2016, at 04:14.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

 Page semi-protected
Assassin's Creed
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the series. For the first game in the series, see Assassin's Creed (video game). For the book series, see Assassin's Creed (book series). For the upcoming film, see Assassin's Creed (film).
Assassin's Creed
Assassin's Creed Logo.svg
Genres	
Action-adventure
Stealth
Developers	
Ubisoft Montreal
Ubisoft Annecy
Ubisoft Sofia
Ubisoft Milan
Ubisoft Quebec
Ubisoft Toronto
Gameloft
Griptonite Games
Ubisoft Blue Byte
Publishers	Ubisoft
Creators	
Patrice Dsilets
Jade Raymond
Corey May
First release	Assassin's Creed
November 13, 2007
Latest release	Assassin's Creed Chronicles: Russia
February 9, 2016
Assassin's Creed is an action-adventure video game series created by Ubisoft that consists of nine main games and a number of supporting materials. The games have appeared on the PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Microsoft Windows, OS X, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, PlayStation Vita, iOS, HP webOS,[1] Android, Nokia Symbian Windows Phone platforms, and the Wii U.

The games are set in a fictional history of real world events and follows the centuries-old struggle between the Assassins, who fight for peace with free will, and the Templars, who desire peace through control. The main games in the franchise were developed by Ubisoft Montreal for the single player and Ubisoft Annecy for the multiplayer, with the handheld titles developed by Gameloft and Gryptonite Studios, with additional development by Ubisoft Montreal. The series has been well received by the public and critics, and has sold over 73 million copies as of April 2014, becoming Ubisoft's best selling franchise.[2] The series took inspiration from the novel Alamut by the Slovenian writer Vladimir Bartol,[3] while building upon concepts from the Prince of Persia series.[4]

Contents  [hide] 
1	Premise
2	Gameplay
3	Release history
4	Main series
4.1	Assassin's Creed
4.2	Assassin's Creed II
4.3	Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood
4.4	Assassin's Creed: Revelations
4.5	Assassin's Creed III
4.6	Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag
4.7	Assassin's Creed Rogue
4.8	Assassin's Creed Unity
4.9	Assassin's Creed Syndicate
5	Other games
5.1	Assassin's Creed: Alta?r's Chronicles
5.2	Assassin's Creed: Bloodlines
5.3	Assassin's Creed II: Discovery
5.4	Assassin's Creed: Project Legacy
5.5	Assassin's Creed: Recollection
5.6	Assassin's Creed: Multiplayer Rearmed
5.7	Assassin's Creed III: Liberation
5.8	Assassin's Creed: Pirates
5.9	Assassin's Creed Memories
5.10	Assassin's Creed Chronicles
5.11	Assassin's Creed Identity
6	Cancelled games
6.1	Assassin's Creed: Lost Legacy
6.2	Assassin's Creed: Utopia
7	Future
8	Other media
8.1	Comics
8.2	Films
8.3	Novels
8.4	Books
8.5	In other media
9	Reception
10	References
11	External links
Premise
The Assassin's Creed games primarily revolve around the rivalry between two ancient secret societies: the Assassins and the Knights Templar, and their indirect relation to an ancient species pre-dating humanity, whose society, along with much of Earth's biosphere, was destroyed by a massive solar storm. The games' real-world chronological setting begins in the year 2012, and features Desmond Miles, a bartender who is a descendant of several lines of prominent Assassins; though raised as an Assassin, he left his nomadic family to seek out a more common lifestyle. He is initially kidnapped by the megacorporation Abstergo Industries, the modern-day face of the Knights Templar, who are aware of Desmond's ancestral lineage. Desmond is forced to use the "Animus", a device that allows him to experience his "ancestral memories". Abstergo is seeking to discover the location of several artifacts, or the "Pieces of Eden", that hold great power, to control mankind and alter its fate, bringing humanity into one single unified group. Desmond also encounters a small team of modern-day Assassins; agreeing to work with them, Desmond uses their version of the Animus (the Animus 2.0) to continue to experience the memories of his ancestors to discover the locations of additional Pieces of Eden so they can be recovered before Abstergo can do so. While experiencing these memories, some of their abilities are genetically leaked into Desmond, known as the Bleeding Effect, giving him some of the Assassin skills of his predecessors at the cost of living with multiple sets of memories and personalities in his mind.

Within the Animus, Desmond explores the memories of a number of Assassins, including Alta?r Ibn-La'Ahad, an initially disgraced Assassin working to redeem himself during the Third Crusade; Ezio Auditore da Firenze, an Assassin in Italy during the late 15th and early 16th centuries of the Italian Renaissance, and Ratohnhak:ton, otherwise known as Connor, a half-Mohawk, half-British Assassin during the American Revolution. Throughout these events, Desmond learns of allusions to the prophetic end of the world in 2012 from a former Animus test subject, Subject 16: the event turns out to be a repeat of the disaster which wiped out the ancient civilization, and he finds out that his memories hold the key to Earth's surviving the second storm. During his experiences, Desmond is aided by holographic projections of three of the ancient race's rulers: Jupiter, Minerva, and Juno. After Desmond dies to ensure Earth's survival, his memories, which have survived in cyberspace,[5] are accessed by Abstergo, which hires a new subject to enter the Animus. The new subject relives the memories of Edward Kenway, Ratohnhak:ton's grandfather and a privateer-turned-pirate during the British colonial years.[6]

Gameplay
While the game is presented through protagonist Desmond Miles, the bulk of the game is played as Desmond experiences the memories of his ancestors through an advanced device called the Animus. This provides a means of a diegetic interface, showing Desmond's ancestor's health, equipment, goals, and other features as part of the Animus interface. The Animus is based on the player controlling the assassin to maintain the synchronization between Desmond and his ancestor's memories. Performing actions that go against the Assassin's way or dying breaks the synchronization, effectively requiring the player to restart at a previous checkpoint. Furthermore, the player cannot explore outside areas that the assassin has not experienced yet. There are also abnormalities within the Animus from previous users of the device.

While playing as the Assassin characters, the games are generally presented as third-person in an open world, focusing on stealth and free-running. The games use a mission structure to follow the main story, generally assigning the player to complete an assassination of public figureheads or a covert mission. Alternatively, several side missions are available, such as mapping out the expansive cities from a high perch followed by performing a "leap of faith" into a haystack below, collecting treasures hidden across the cities, exploring ruins for relics, building a brotherhood of assassins to perform other tasks, or funding the rebuilding of a city through purchasing and upgrading of shops and other features. At times, the player is in direct control of Desmond, who by nature of the Animus use has learned Assassin techniques through the bleeding effect, as well as their genetic ability of Eagle Vision, which separates friend, foe and assassination targets by illuminating people in different colors. Through the Animus interface, the player can go back to retry any past mission already completed; for example, in Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood, the player achieves better synchronization results by performing the mission in a specific manner such as by only killing the mission's target.

The games use the concept of "active" versus "passive" moves, with "active" moves, such as running, climbing the sides of buildings, or jumping between rooftops, more likely to alert the attention of nearby guards. When the guards become alerted, the player must either fight them or break their line of sight and locate a hiding place, such as a haystack or a well, and wait until the guards' alert is reduced. The combat system allows for a number of unique weapons, armor, and moves, including the use of a hidden blade set in a bracer on the Assassin's arm, and which also can be used to quietly assassinate targets.

Release history
Games, by year and platform.
Bold title denotes part of the main series.
Time period	Title	Year	Consoles	Computers	Handhelds	Mobile	Other
Third Crusade	Assassin's Creed	2007	PlayStation 3, Xbox 360	Windows			
Assassin's Creed: Alta?r's Chronicles	2008			Nintendo DS	Android, iOS, Symbian, webOS, Windows Phone	
Assassin's Creed: Bloodlines	2009			PlayStation Portable		
Renaissance	Assassin's Creed II	PlayStation 3, Xbox 360	OS X, Windows		Symbian	OnLive
Assassin's Creed II: Discovery			Nintendo DS	iOS	
Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood	2010	PlayStation 3, Xbox 360	OS X, Windows		Symbian	OnLive
Assassin's Creed: Revelations	2011	Windows		Android, Symbian
Colonial era	Assassin's Creed III	2012	PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii U		Symbian	
Assassin's Creed III: Liberation[a]	PlayStation 3, Xbox 360	PlayStation Vita		
Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag	2013	PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii U, PlayStation 4, Xbox One			
Assassin's Creed Rogue	2014	PlayStation 3, Xbox 360			
Assassin's Creed Identity				Android, iOS	
French Revolution	Assassin's Creed Unity	PlayStation 4, Xbox One	Windows			
Imperial China	Assassin's Creed Chronicles: China[b]	2015	PlayStation Vita[c]		
Victorian era	Assassin's Creed Syndicate			
Sikh Empire	Assassin's Creed Chronicles: India	2016	PlayStation Vita[c]		
October Revolution	Assassin's Creed Chronicles: Russia		
Notes
Jump up ^ Released under the title Assassin's Creed: Liberation HD for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360.
Jump up ^ Originally announced as part of the season pass for Assassin's Creed Unity.
^ Jump up to: a b Released as a compilation titled Assassin's Creed Chronicles Trilogy Pack.
Main series
Assassin's Creed
Main article: Assassin's Creed (video game)
Desmond is captured by Abstergo and forced to use a machine called the Animus to explore Alta?r ibn-La'Ahad's memories during the time of the Third Crusade. Desmond begins to witness events after Alta?r breaks all three tenets of the Assassin Brotherhood while attempting to stop Robert de Sabl from taking a Piece of Eden. Al Mualim, the Brotherhood's leader, demotes Alta?r to Novice and tasks him with assassinating the nine Knights Templars, including de Sabl, to regain his former status. Alta?r's quest eventually leads him to face de Sabl in the presence of King Richard I of England warning the King of de Sabl's plot to kill him. Alta?r defeats de Sabl, but with his last words, de Sabl reveals that there were ten Templars, the last being Al Mualim, who now holds the Piece of Eden. Alta?r returns to face Al Mualim, struggling to fight through the illusions created by the Piece, but eventually kills Al Mualim. When Alta?r recovers the piece, heand those watching the Animuswitness a holographic map showing locations across the globe where other artifacts are located. Desmond is pulled from the Animus, and was going to be killed, but his life is spared by Lucy Stillman, an Assassin working as a mole within Abstergo, as she claims they might need to further examine his memories later. He comes to learn that a former test subject had left messages only Desmond can see, foretelling of the end of the world in 2012.

The first Assassin's Creed introduced elements that would remain cornerstones of the rest of the series. The game attempts to create historical versions of Masyaf (the Brotherhood's location), Jerusalem, Acre and Damascus, and incorporates a number of documented historical figures into the story. The virtualized Animus system, free running, climbing, stealth, and parkour elements were all present in this title, as well as the initial formulation of the combat system. The player would have to complete a number of side quests before they would be able to obtain an assassin quest from a local Brotherhood guidemaster in each city, though future games would abandon this prerequisite.

Assassin's Creed II
Main article: Assassin's Creed II
Lucy returns and breaks Desmond out of Abstergo, taking him to an Assassin safehouse and introduced to Shaun, a historian, and Rebecca, their technical support. Using an improved version of the Animus, Desmond takes witness to Ezio Auditore da Firenze, a young nobleman from the late 15th Century in Florence, shortly before the execution of Ezio's father and brothers by order of a corrupt official working for the Templars. He and his mother and sister take to hiding at the Monteriggioni villa owned by his uncle Mario, who helps to train Ezio in the ways of an Assassin. Ezio and Mario discover that Rodrigo Borgia is the figurehead of a number of Templars all who were accomplices in the execution of his family, and with help of allies like Leonardo da Vinci, methodically assassinate the lower-ranked Templars, while learning that Borgia has acquired a Piece of Eden called the Apple. Eventually, Ezio corners Borgia, who hands over the Piece and flees; Ezio is inducted into the ranks of the Brotherhood and believed to be a prophet based on their codex. A decade later, the Brotherhood learns that Borgia has since become Pope Alexander VI, using the Church's influence to strengthen the Templars. Ezio invades Vatican City and confronts Borgia, discovering that the Papal staff is also a Piece of Eden. Defeating Borgia but sparing his life, Ezio uses both the Apple and the Papal staff to reveal a chamber of ancient technology. Inside, he is addressed by a hologram of a humanoid female that calls herself Minerva who speaks directly to Desmond through Ezio. Minerva explains how her society had pre-dated humanity's, but a great disaster nearly wiped them out, and warns that another event is due to occur soon, putting the fate of humanity in Desmond's hands. At this discovery, Desmond and his allies find the safehouse has been compromised by Abstergo and flee.

Similar to the first game, Assassin's Creed takes place in historical recreations of Venice, Florence, Forl, San Gimignano, and the Tuscan countryside, and incorporates events during that period as part of the story. Missions are divided into main story missions, themselves divided into memory sequences reflected points along Ezio's life, and side missions which can be accomplished at any time; this approach to mission structure remains consistent in the other games in the series. The Monteriggioni villa provides several functions which can be expanded on by paying money for upgrades of surrounding buildings, or by purchasing artwork, weapons, and costumes for the villa; in turn, the villa will generate wealth for the player at a rate influenced by the upgrades and acquisition of these items. Additional quests involve locating secret Assassin seals, and finding hidden marks left by "Subject 16", a former Animus user, that hint at the nature of Minerva's society.

Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood
Main article: Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood
Desmond and his allies retreat to the ruins of the Monteriggioni villa, and Desmond reenters the Animus to continue Ezio's memories, specifically to identify the location of the Apple. After facing against Rodrigo Borgia, Ezio returned to Monteriggioni, but the villa is soon attacked by forces under the command of Cesare Borgia, Rodrigo's son. Mario is killed and the Apple is stolen. Ezio vows revenge by helping to free the people of Rome from the Borgia family. As Ezio works covertly to turn the city against the Borgias, he gains followers that want to join his cause, and Ezio trains them in the way of the Assassins. In an attempt to assassinate Cesare and Rodrigo at the Castel Sant'Angelo, Ezio instead witnesses Cesare forcing his father to eat a poisoned apple that Rodrigo had prepared to kill his son. Ezio chases down Cesare and eventually captures him and recovers the Apple. Cesare is taken to prison in Viana, Spain but manages to escape with help of his allies. The Assassins lead the fight against Cesare and the remaining loyal Borgia troops, and eventually Ezio throws Cesare from the castle walls, killing him. With no perceived further threats, Ezio takes to hide the Apple under the Colosseum. In the present, Desmond is able to navigate through the underground chambers beneath the Colosseum to locate the Apple. As he picks it up, Desmond is witness to another hologram figure, calling herself Juno, and who controls Desmond to stab Lucy (because Lucy has defected to the Templars) before he falls into a coma.

Brotherhood shares many of the same features as the previous game though it takes place primarily in Rome. Similar to the villa, the player is able to spend money to buy and upgrade shops and other facilities throughout the city as to increase revenue they can collect from it; however, the player will be required to destroy Borgia towers that control various sections of the city before they can do so. The Brotherhood of Assassins is introduced, by which, after saving citizens from certain events, the player can invite these citizens as Assassins; they can then be dispatched to remote locations across Europe to gain experience and money, or can be called in to help the player directly in a mission. For the first time in the series, the game features online multiplayer. Players play as Abstergo employees, who, through the use of the Animus, take on the genetic memories of Renaissance Templars in various game modes.[7]

Assassin's Creed: Revelations
Main article: Assassin's Creed: Revelations
Desmond comes to consciousness in a virtual area within the Animus, the Animus Island, where he meets the digital personality of Subject 16. Subject 16 explains that from the trauma of stabbing Lucy, Desmond must complete the memories of both Alta?r and Ezio to be able to separate his mind from theirs and to allow him to come out of his coma; however, doing so will destabilize the island as the Animus recovers that memory segment and at one point Subject 16 sacrifices himself to allow Desmond to continue. Desmond rejoins Ezio's story many years after Brotherhood, where Ezio is curious to the Assassin's origins and has traveled to Masyaf to locate their original headquarters. He finds Alta?r's library, though it is locked by five keys which the Templars are also seeking, believing there to be great power within it. Ezio travels to the Ottoman-era Constantinople where the keys are said to have been hidden by explorer Niccol Polo, and finds the city embroiled by the feuding brothers Selim and Ahmet vying for the Sultanate, the Templars secretly behind the battle. While searching for the keys, Ezio meets and falls in love with Sofia Sartor. Eventually, Ahmet is revealed as the agent for the Templars, and is killed by Selim, who thanks Ezio for his help but banishes him from the city for his own good.

Ezio - and through him, Desmond - uses the keys to witness Alta?r's memories following the death of Al Mualim. These show Alta?r having lost his wife and youngest son in the midst of a coup d'etat within the Assassins followed by a twenty-year self-imposed exile. Eventually, Alta?r returned to Masyaf, killed the usurper, and retook control. Near death, Alta?r inscribed the keys with his memories and gave them to his friend Niccol to hide at a distant location, before disappearing into his library forever. In Ezio's present, he and Sofia go to Masyaf and open the library to find Alta?r's corpse and the Piece of Eden he possessed. Ezio leaves the Piece as well as his assassin tools, and speaks directly to Desmond, knowing he was only a conduit for him, and hopes he finds the answer he needs. Desmond is then approached by another holographic figure, Jupiter, who explains that their society had tried to use technology to stop the destruction of the earth's surface by a massive solar flare but failed, but they had stored their repository of knowledge in several vaults linked to a central vault which Desmond must use to stop another similar flare that will occur soon; Desmond recognizes the location in New England. Desmond wakes up from his coma, finding Rebecca, Shaun, and to his surprise, his father William, there. After learning that Lucy died from his stabbing, he informs of the location in New York, the Temple that will save humanity.

Revelations includes many new systems, including additional weapons. Bomb-crafting is now available, allowing the player to create explosive, distraction and tactical bombs, using materials found throughout the world and on Assassin's Guild missions. As the player progresses through, Ezio can train new recruits to defend "dens" (Assassin HQs) and an upgraded Assassin's missions section called "Mediterranean Defense" in which the player works to strip control of various cities from Templar hands. The hookblade is also introduced, which can be used in free-running (to travel along zip wires and climb more easily) and in combat (to manipulate enemies). Eagle Vision has been upgraded to Eagle Sense, which allows Ezio to not only see where his enemies and targets are but where they have been and where they are going to be. The multiplayer mode returns in Revelations, this time with more characters, modes, and maps, and by advancing up through levels of experience, the player learns more about Abstergo's history.

Assassin's Creed III
Main article: Assassin's Creed III
Desmond and his allies arrive at the Temple entrance in a cave in the New York area on October 31, 2012, and open its door using the Apple Of Eden, discovering a larger chamber of Precursor technology behind it, including another door requiring a key. Desmond suddenly falls into a fugue state, and is put into the Animus. There, he experiences the memories of a half Mohawk, half British man named Ratonhnhak:ton (/?r?du?n?h?e?du?n/; "Ra-doon-ha-kay-doon"),[8] later dubbed Connor (Achilles calls him this in memory of his dead son), who lived through the American Revolution, as well as Connor's father, Haytham Kenway, who is later revealed as a British agent of the Templars. Kenway had gone to the Colonies in America with a stolen medallion, recruited Templar allies including Charles Lee, and worked to gain the trust of the Mohawk people to get them to show him the location of the Temple, but to his annoyance, the medallion did not open the Temple for him. Connor, as a young boy, witnesses Lee and his troops set fire to his village, killing his mother; years later, he is shown a Piece of Eden, through which Juno speaks to him and instructs him to get training from Master Assassin Achilles Davenport. Achilles takes Connor and teaches him about Assassins and introduces him to Patriots in the Revolution, through which Connor stops several Templar plans to disrupt their efforts including an assassination attempt against George Washington. During these memories, Desmond does recover from the fugue state, and helps his allies to recover power sources to power the Temple scattered about the globe, including one held by Abstergo.

Connor eventually encounters his father, but Kenway offers a cease fire, as he is also after Benjamin Church for usurping his authority. During their investigation, Kenway warns Connor that the Patriots, worried of the allegiance of the various tribes to the British, are seeking to remove Connor's people from their lands. Connor eventually hunts Lee down and kills him, taking the medallion and ending the Templar threat. He is despondent to find his tribe's village abandoned save for the Piece of Eden; through it, Juno tells him to hide the amulet. As December 21 approaches and signs of the solar flare begin to ensue, Desmond and his allies find the buried medallion, and use it at the inner Temple door, behind which is a control sphere. Juno appears and encourages Desmond to touch it, but Minerva appears and warns him to stop it, warning that this will release Juno as an entity that may protect against the solar flare but will be a threat to mankind in the future. Juno counters, explaining that Minerva would rather have most of humanity wiped out, with Desmond safe in the Temple to emerge as a religious figure to lead the survivors but ultimately leading into conflict. Desmond opts to release Juno, believing humanity will have a better chance fighting Juno. As his body is wracked by energy from the control sphere, an aurora surrounds the Earth and protects it from the solar flare. Juno tells the now fallen Desmond that his work is now done, and now it is time for her to do her work.

Assassin's Creed III is structured similarly to the previous games, with missions taking place on an open-world map based on Colonial Boston and New York, and offers a large wilderness area, the Frontier and in the Davenport Homestead, where the player can hunt animals for materials, which then subsequently can be used to construct goods to be traded and sold throughout the colonies. Naval battles were introduced, wherein the player must steer a warship named Aquila in dangerous waters and perform ship-to-ship combat with cannons and mounted guns. In Assassin's Creed III there are a large assortment of mini missions to play and many different outfits to purchase as the player progresses through the game. The modern-day aspects of the story were also significantly expanded, and featured missions taking place in, among other locations, Manhattan, Rome and Brazil.

Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag
Main article: Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag
Samples taken from Desmond Miles' body in the moments after his death have enabled Abstergo Industries to continue to explore his genetic memories using the Animus' newfound cloud computing abilities. The unnamed player character is hired by Abstergo's entertainment division to sift through the memories of Edward Kenway, an eighteenth-century pirate and the grandfather of Connor. Ostensibly, this is to gather material for an Animus-powered interactive feature film, but in reality, Abstergo and the Templars are searching for the Observatory, a Precursor structure that allows the user to see through the eyes of a subject. As Kenway, the player must unravel a conspiracy between high-ranking Templars to manipulate the British, Spanish and French empires into locating the Sage - later identified as Bartholomew Roberts - who is the only man who can lead them to the Observatory.

In the present day, the player is contacted by John, Abstergo Entertainment's information technology manager. John convinces the player that his employer knows more than they are telling, and encourages them to investigate in more detail. He arranges for the player to access the Animus' core, at which point Juno materialises into an incorporeal form. She reveals that although it was necessary to open her temple to avert disaster, the world was not ready for her, and she is unable to affect it or possess the player character as her agents intended. John is unmasked as the reincarnated form of the Sage and attempts to murder the player to cover up the failed attempt at resurrecting Juno, but is killed by Abstergo's security before he can do so. As Roberts, the Sage admits to Kenway that he owes no allegiance to the Assassins or the Templars and instead uses whoever he thinks represents his best chance of achieving his ends.

Assassin's Creed Rogue
Main article: Assassin's Creed Rogue
By March 2014, a game titled or code-named "Comet", was revealed to be in development, for release on PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360.[9] By the end of the month, additional reports indicated that "Comet" would be set around 1758 in New York, as well as feature sailing on the Atlantic Ocean. The game would be a direct sequel to Black Flag, and would feature a Templar named Shay as the main protagonist. Haytham Kenway from III and Adewal from Black Flag would also make appearances.[10] On August 5, Ubisoft officially announced the game as Assassin's Creed Rogue. The game features the Templar Shay Patrick Cormac, a first for the series, and is set during the Seven Years' War across various locations in North America.[11] It is meant to "fill the gaps" of the story between III and Black Flag and has "a crucial link to the Kenway saga", as well as connecting to Unity.[12] It was released in North America on the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 on November 11, 2014[11] and in Europe and Australasia on November 13, 2014.[13] It was released on Windows in March 2015.[14]

Assassin's Creed Unity
Main article: Assassin's Creed Unity
On March 19, 2014, images leaked for the next game, titled or code-named Unity, showing a new assassin in Paris.[9] On March 21, Ubisoft confirmed the game's existence, having been in development for more than three years, by releasing pre-alpha game footage.[15] The game, which features up to four player co-op, a first for the series,[16] is set in Paris on the eve of the French Revolution and follow Arno Dorian and his fellow assassins.[17] It was released in North America on the PlayStation 4, Xbox One and Windows on November 11, 2014 and in Europe and Australasia on November 13, 2014.[13]

Assassin's Creed Syndicate
Main article: Assassin's Creed Syndicate
In December 2014, images and information leaked for a new Assassin's Creed game, titled or code-named Victory, which was later confirmed by Ubisoft. Victory will release in late 2015 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One and is being developed by Ubisoft Quebec. It will be set in 1868 Victorian era London and feature a new assassin protagonist.[18] In May 2015, Kotaku leaked that Victory has been renamed Syndicate.[19] On May 12, 2015, the game was officially announced by Ubisoft.[20] The PlayStation 4 and the Xbox One version of the game was released on October 23, 2015, while the Microsoft Windows version was released on November 19, 2015.[21]

Other games
Assassin's Creed: Alta?r's Chronicles
Main article: Assassin's Creed: Alta?r's Chronicles
Alta?r Ibn-La'Ahad is sent on a mission from the Order of Assassins to retrieve a Chalice from the grasps of both the Crusaders and the Saracens. Alta?r quests to find three different magic keys then travels to Jerusalem to face the head of the Knights Templar, Basilisk. Upon arriving, he learns that the Chalice is not an object, but a woman named Adha who reveals that Alta?r has been deceived by an assassin named Harash, who is now a double-agent for the Templars. After killing both Harash and Basilisk, Alta?r attempts to save a kidnapped Adha from captivity but is too late. The game ends with a captured Adha sailing away and Alta?r left in the holy land.

Assassin's Creed: Bloodlines
Main article: Assassin's Creed: Bloodlines
Alta?r has traveled to Cyprus from the Holy Land in order to assassinate the last remnants of the Templars. Here Alta?r again meets Maria and they travel together to kill the remaining Templars and learn more about the "Apple of Eden" and the mysterious Templar Archive where more of the artifacts are believed to be hidden. Alta?r manages to kill the new Templar Grand Master, Armand Bouchart, and his followers, but the Archive's contents are discovered to have already been taken from Cyprus.

Assassin's Creed II: Discovery
Main article: Assassin's Creed II: Discovery
After losing the Apple of Eden to Girolamo Savonarola, Ezio is told to meet Antonio, his fellow Assassin. When doing so, Ezio finds Antonio with another man named Luis Santangel, who asks Ezio to rescue his friend Christoffa Corombo from a presumed Templar trap set up by Rodrigo Borgia. Ezio rescues Christoffa from this trap, and is informed that Assassins in Spain are captured and executed by Tomas Torquemada. Ezio, who feels that it is his duty to rescue the Assassins, sets out for Spain to fight back against the Spanish Inquisition. Along the way, Ezio finds out that Torquemada was ordered to commit these actions by Rodrigo Borgia, who leads Torquemada to believe that God desired it so. Ezio also finds out that his close allies, Luis Santangel and Raphael Sanchez, are in fact Assassins themselves. When finally confronting Torquemada, Ezio chooses not to kill him thinking that Torquemada is merely misled by Borgia and not a Templar himself. Ezio then returns to Italy to continue his search for the Apple of Eden.

Assassin's Creed: Project Legacy
Assassin's Creed: Project Legacy was a single-player browser-based role-playing game Facebook application, designed as a promotion, and tie-in for Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood. The game is mostly text-based, but includes graphics and sound as well as some video.

Players are test subjects for Abstergo Industries who relive the lives of other test subjects' ancestors through the DDS (Data Dump Scanner) as opposed to the Animus. These ancestors are Assassins.

The first mission pack is titled "Italian Wars," and is divided into four chapters. Chapter one focuses on Bartolomeo d'Alviano during the Battle of Agnadello. The second chapter focuses on Francesco Vecellio on a mission to kill Niccol di Pitigliano (cousin of Bartolomeo d'Alviano). The third focuses on Mario Auditore and the protection of Monteriggioni. The fourth and final chapter focuses on Perotto Calderon, an undercover assassin who watches over Lucrezia Borgia, with whom he falls in love.

The second mission pack, entitled "Rome," was released November 16, 2010. The first chapter takes place between 1497 and 1503, and deals with the ex-courtesan, Fiora Cavazza. It deals with Fiora's involvement in recruiting an army for the Borgia, and her subsequent betrayal. The second takes place in 1503, and involves Giovanni Borgia, fleeing his family and eventually joining the assassins. Chapter three involves Francesco Vecellio, and his training to be an assassin under Ezio Auditore. Chapter four again focuses on Giovanni Borgia, now an Assassin and joining Hernn Corts on his journey to Tenochtitlan to acquire a "Piece of Eden," one of the Crystal Skulls. Giovanni brought it to Bombastus for study, resulting in the discovery of the formula for the Philosopher's stone.

The third mission pack, entitled "Holidays," and its first Chapter called Ghosts of Christmas Past were released on December 21, 2010 with further missions to be released in 2011.[needs update] The first chapter takes place at various times and places in history: during the World War I Christmas Truce, the Beagle 2 truth, the return of Charles II back to England, and the time of the Shroud of Turin.

A fourth story pack, "The Divine Science Story Pack" was announced, but never released. Also, an updated user interface, referred to as the "DDS 2.0", was listed as coming soon, with enhancements and an easier way of choosing mission packs and crafting equipment, however this was also never released.

The game was later shutdown from Facebook and put on an indefinite hold. According to Ubisoft, the reason for the shutdown was that the game's manager had mysteriously disappeared, although it was clearly for marketing purposes. It is unknown when the game will be back into action.

Assassin's Creed: Recollection
Assassin's Creed: Recollection is a real-time board game developed for iOS. The game delivers a new experience to the Assassin's Creed world in which fans and new players alike go head-to-head in real-time political battles with characters and locations from the franchise. Players can also unlock a collection of artwork, spanning the series. The game features over 280 Memories, reconnecting with characters from Assassin's Creed II and Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood. The single-player Story Mode has 10+ hours of gameplay, with 20 missions taking place from Barcelona to Constantinople and 10 challenge missions. In Versus Mode, players can challenge their friends and people from around the world, pitting their strategies and abilities against one another. The game supports Game Center, allowing players to track achievements, challenge friends, and play against the world over. Go behinds the scenes with the Art Gallery, a collection of artwork spanning the entire franchise (Assassin's Creed, Assassin's Creed II, Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood, Assassin's Creed: Revelations and Assassin's Creed III) showcasing the high level of quality in character design as well as the attention to detail in the locations. Through the Store, players have the option to Buy Packs for the in-game currency, Animus Credits (Animus Credits may also be purchased through an In-App Purchase), or to Buy/Sell Memories from/to other players in the Market. The short film Assassin's Creed: Embers is also featured within the game.[22]

Assassin's Creed: Multiplayer Rearmed
Assassin's Creed: Multiplayer Rearmed is a multiplayer video game designed for iOS. It is the only Assassin's Creed Multiplayer driven by an in-game economy. The aim is to assassinate the assigned target and avoid being killed by your own hunter. The player can purchase additional items, characters and abilities as well as compete with friends and foes from around the globe in a 4 player realtime online multiplayer mode. Players can connect via Game Center using either WI-FI or 3G. It is also possible to play against someone in the immediate area via Bluetooth. Available map locations include Jerusalem, San Donato, Venice and Alhambra.[23]

Assassin's Creed III: Liberation
Main article: Assassin's Creed III: Liberation
An original Assassin's Creed title for the PlayStation Vita was announced to be in development during Gamescom 2011, and would feature a new story with new characters. On June 4, 2012 at E3, Liberation was officially announced.[24] The main protagonist is a Creole female, named Aveline.[25] Aveline is the daughter of a French merchant father and an African mother. She is recruited into the Assassin Order by a former slave and fights against slavery as well as the Templars. Aveline uses a variety of new weapons in combat, including a machete and a blowpipe for ranged attacks.

It was announced on September 10, 2013, that the game would be re-released as Assassin's Creed: Liberation HD for PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and Microsoft Windows via the PlayStation Network, Xbox Live Arcade and Steam, respectively, in January 2014.[26]

Assassin's Creed: Pirates
Assassin's Creed: Pirates is a mobile game, that was released on iOS and Android devices on December 5, 2013.[27] Developed by Ubisoft Paris,[28] the game follows Captain Alonzo Batilla, who is neither Assassin nor Templar, as he commands a ship and crew, while crossing paths with the Assassins and Templars. Gameplay focuses on real-time battles between ships. The title is in 3D and features both wind and weather that will affect how players proceed.[29]

Assassin's Creed Memories
Assassin's Creed Memories is a mobile game that was released on iOS devices on August 20, 2014. Developed along with PlayNext and Gree, the game combines card collection and battling, target chasing, and strategy elements, along with the option of competitive multiplayer. Additional multiplayer options include allowing players to join a guild and then engage in 20 vs 20 guild combat scenarios. Memories features different historical eras, including the Third Crusade, the golden age of piracy, feudal Japan and the Mongolian Empire.[30]

Assassin's Creed Chronicles
Main article: Assassin's Creed Chronicles
Assassin's Creed Chronicles is an episodic 2.5D action game for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One. The first episode is available with the purchase of Assassin's Creed Unity's DLC season pass and features Shao Jun in 16th century China.[31] The second entry, India, was released on January 12, 2016 on the same platforms, and the last entry, Russia, was released on February 9, 2016.[32]

Assassin's Creed Identity
Main article: Assassin's Creed Identity
Assassin's Creed Identity is a game for iOS devices that was released worldwide on 25 February 2016. It is a 3D third-person role-playing game. It had a soft-launch in Australia and New Zealand in 2014.[33]

Cancelled games
Assassin's Creed: Lost Legacy
Assassin's Creed: Lost Legacy was a planned Nintendo 3DS title. It would see Ezio travel to Masyaf. However, the concept evolved into what would become Assassin's Creed: Revelations, and the 3DS title was announced as cancelled on July 15, 2011.[34]

Assassin's Creed: Utopia
Assassin's Creed: Utopia is a cancelled mobile game which was planned to be available on Android and iOS devices.[35][36] The game's story would have led into Assassin's Creed III, though there would have been no links in terms of gameplay.[37]

Utopia would have taken place in the 17th century, at the very beginning of the colonization of North America. It would have spaned over 150 years, to help players "discover how the Assassins influenced history and helped shape the nation's original thirteen colonies."[38] The gameplay involved building a colonial city, and was planned to have more of a "social slant" than any of the earlier games.[citation needed] The Assassins of each colony would have taken on their enemies in "limited time epic battles", and players would have been able to pit their strength against friends in asynchronous 3D brawls.[38]

Future
Asked about the future of the series in 2009, Sbastien Puel from Ubisoft said that "we could do 35 of these [Assassin's Creed games]",[39] while Laurent Detoc from Ubisoft later said "we hope to reach Assassin's Creed 10".[40]

In November 2011, a Ubisoft survey was sent out, asking participants which locations and time periods they would like to see in the "next Assassin's Creed games". These settings were Medieval China, Victorian England, Ancient Egypt, the Portuguese and/or Spanish Invasion of the Americas, the American Revolution, the Russian Revolution, Feudal Japan, and Ancient Rome.[41] Alex Hutchinson, creative director of Assassin's Creed III, suggested the most requested Assassin's Creed settings, World War II, Feudal Japan and Ancient Egypt, are "the three worst settings for an Assassin's Creed game".[42] However, Hutchinson stated both he and Corey May were open to the idea of a future entry set during the time of the British Raj,[43] which now consists of the modern states of India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Myanmar. Victorian England, the American Revolution and the Russian Revolution were subsequently used for Assassin's Creed Syndicate, Assassin's Creed III, and Assassin's Creed Chronicles, respectively, with World War II appearing as a section of Syndicate.

In June 2013, Ubisoft CEO Yves Guillemot stated on the development cycle of the games, saying, "We are making sure the teams who are creating the different iterations have enough timetwo years, three years, so that they can take risk and they can change the concept enough so that it can be appealing and fresh."[44] The following August, Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag's director Ashraf Ismail, said that the ending of the franchise had been written, saying "We have an idea of where the end is, what the end is. But of course Yves [Guillemot] announced we are a yearly title, we ship one game a year. So depending on the setting, depending on what fans want, we've given ourselves room to fit more in this arc. But there is an end."[45] In a later interview, Ismail commented that he and the team would be interested in doing an Assassin's Creed game in an Ancient Egyptian setting, along with reiterating an earlier statement that a female leading character was not an impossibility for the series.[46]

In May 2014, Guillemot stated that Assassin's Creed games would continue releasing on the last generation PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 "for the foreseeable future", despite the franchise moving to the current generation PlayStation 4 and Xbox One with Assassin's Creed Unity.[47] In February 2016, Ubisoft announced they would not be releasing a new game in 2016 in order to step "back and [re-examine] the Assassins Creed franchise... [and take the] year to evolve the game mechanics and to make sure were delivering on the promise of Assassins Creed offering unique and memorable gameplay experiences".[48] On the decision, Guillemot said that "Ubisoft started to question the annualized franchise with the release of Assassin's Creed Unity, and the fact that Assassin's Creed Syndicate had "a slower launch than expected." Guillemot added that "by moving away from the annual iterations of the franchise, it will give the Assassin's Creed teams more time to take advantage of new engines and technology."[49]

Other media
Ubisoft expanded Assassin's Creed franchise to other media, including films, comic books and novels.

Comics
Assassin's Creed: Graphic Novel
In the limited edition of Assassin's Creed, an 8-page graphic novel was included, that showed two side-stories of Alta?r Ibn-La'Ahad and Desmond Miles. The novel was also distributed to EB Games store managers in 2007 to promote the game. The story serves as a prelude to the first Assassin's Creed game and is narrated simultaneously by both characters. In it, the novel covers Desmond's escape from Abstergo in the year 2012 and also one of Alta?r's assassination missions in the year 1191. The start of the novel involves the introduction of the two characters with Alta?r calling himself a hunter, while Desmond is a prisoner. Although initially they describe themselves otherwise, by the end of the novel they both re-introduce themselves as assassins.

Assassin's Creed, Volume 1: Desmond
Assassin's Creed Volume 1: Desmond is a French-language graphic novel written by Eric Corbeyran and drawn by Djilalli Defaux. It has been released only in France, Canada, Belgium, Poland and Italy. The comic book was published on November 13, 2009, a few days before Assassin's Creed II was released.[50] The story is a retelling of events from Assassin's Creed and the beginning of Assassin's Creed II, mostly from Desmond's modern perspective; for example it is revealed that Lucy helped the Templars to kidnap Desmond. It also features Subject 16 (referred to as Michael) and a Roman assassin named Aquilus. However, events in the comic book are different from what happens in the game. It is said that Subject 16 is alive but trapped in the animus, a virtual reality simulator used to relive memories of ancient relatives, but there's no mention of Shaun or Rebecca.[51]

Assassin's Creed, Volume 2: Aquilus
Assassin's Creed Volume 2: Aquilus is a French-language graphic novel written by Eric Corbeyran and drawn by Djilalli Defaux. The story opens with a young Desmond recalling his conversation with his father. He wakes up and has a conversation with Lucy. After meeting Rebecca, Shaun and other assassins, they get into a truck and drive to Monteriggioni.

In the meantime, Desmond relives memories of Aquilus through the animus after his apparent death in the first volume. The Roman assassin is rescued by his cousin, Accipiter, and is tasked with a quest to save Lugdunum. He meets with his father and discovers an artifact of the first civilization: an ankh which can temporarily revive the dead. The mysterious object is then stolen by a Templar senator, Vultur, who kills Aquilus' father.

The modern day story continues as Assassins fight Abstergo agents when they're ambushed on the road. Later, it is revealed that there's a traitor among in the Assassins' truck, and Desmond deals with the situation. The group finally arrives in Monteriggioni and at the end, it's hinted that the ankh artifact might be hidden within the town's walls.

Assassin's Creed, Volume 3: Accipiter
Jonathan Hawk was sent by a suited executive and a lab technician to relive Accipiter's memories. He was sent to 259 CE, when Accipiter's Alamans were crossng the Rodanus into Genava and Aube to face the Roman forces at Oppidum. The battle raged bloodily and long, but Accipiter's forces were eventually victorious. Accipiter was met by the Iberian Assassin Cuervo after the battle, the latter coming to congratulate the Alamans on their victory and to discuss the future.

Assassin's Creed, Volume 4: Hawk
Assassin's Creed, Volume 4: Hawk is the fourth volume of the French graphic novels. It is centered on the story of Jonathan Hawk and his Egyptian ancestor Numa Al'Khamsin, a member of the Assassins in the 14th century. It was released on November 16, 2012.

Assassin's Creed, Volume 5: El Cakr
Assassin's Creed, Volume 5: El Cakr is the fifth volume of the French graphic novels. It is centered on the story of Jonathan Hawk and his Egyptian ancestor Numa Al'Khamsin, also known as "El Cakr". It was released on October 31, 2013.

Assassin's Creed, Volume 6: Leila
Assassin's Creed, Volume 6: Leila is the sixth volume of the French graphic novels. It is centered on the story of Jonathan Hawk and his Egyptian ancestor Numa Al'Khamsin, also known as "El Cakr". It is the last of the Egyptian storyline. It was released on October 31, 2014.

Assassin's Creed: The Fall
Main article: Assassin's Creed: The Fall
In July 2010, Ubisoft announced a three-part comic book mini-series set in the world of Assassin's Creed as a part of their UbiWorkshop initiative.[52] Ubisoft has hired illustrators Cameron Stewart and Karl Kerschl, both winners of multiple comic book awards.[53] The first issue of the series was released on November 10, 2010, the second part on December 1, 2010. It was published by WildStorm.[54] The comic takes place between 1888 and 1908 in Russia and 1998 set in the United States. It follows Nikolai Orelov and his descendant Daniel Cross, a recovering alcoholic experiencing the bleeding effect in a therapist's office.

Assassin's Creed: The Chain
Main article: Assassin's Creed: The Chain
The Chain is a sequel comic to The Fall that completes Nikolai Orelov's story as well as focusing on his descendant, Daniel Cross. The comic will also provide some light on the events of Assassin's Creed III. It was released in mid-2012.[55]

Assassin's Creed: Brahman
Main article: Assassin's Creed: Brahman
Brahman is set in 19th century India, and introduced the new assassin, Arbaaz Mir. It was written by Brendan Fletcher with art by Cameron Stewart and Karl Kerschl. It was released in late-2013 in North America.[56]

Assassin's Creed: Trial by Fire
Main article: Assassin's Creed: Trial by Fire
Oscillating between contemporary San Diego and the Salem witch trials, "Assassin's Creed" follows Charlotte de la Cruz, an over-educated conspiracy theorist, who soon comes under attack from Templars after learning she is the descendent of Assassins.[57] The series is published by Titan Comics, and is written by Kill Shakespeare's Anthony Del Col and Conor McCreery, illustrated by Neil Edwards, and coloured by Ivan Nunes.[58]

Films
Theatrical
Main article: Assassin's Creed (film)
A live-action film, Assassin's Creed, set in the same universe as the video games and other media,[59] is scheduled to be released on December 16, 2016.[60] Development for the film began in October 2011, when Sony Pictures entered final negotiations with Ubisoft Motion Pictures to make the film.[61] In July 2012, Michael Fassbender was announced to star in the film, as well as co-produce the film.[62] His role was revealed in August 2015 as Callum Lynch, who's ancestor Aguilar, is an assassin from 15th Century Spain.[63] In October 2012, Ubisoft revealed the film would no longer produced by Sony Pictures, instead co-produced with New Regency and distributed by 20th Century Fox.[64] In January 2013, Michael Lesslie was hired to write the film,[65] with Scott Frank, Adam Cooper and Bill Collage performing rewrites to the script.[66][67] By the end of April 2014, Justin Kurzel was in talks to direct.[68] Principal photography began on August 31, 2015,[63][69][70] and ended on January 15, 2016.[71]

Other
Assassin's Creed: Lineage
Main article: Assassin's Creed: Lineage
Assassin's Creed: Lineage is a 36-minute film serving as a prequel to Assassin's Creed II. The film, released in three parts on YouTube, promoted the game and is the first attempt for Ubisoft to make its first step in the film industry. It is about the story of Giovanni Auditore, Ezio's father, who investigates the mysterious assassination of Duke of Milan Galeazzo Maria Sforza and first learns about Rodrigo Borgia's conspiracy.

Assassin's Creed: Ascendance
Ascendance is an animated short by UbiWorkshop and Ubisoft Montreal, which bridges the gap between Assassin's Creed II and Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood. It tells the backstory of Cesare Borgia's rise to power. The animated short was released on November 16, 2010. The short story takes place in the middle of the events of Brotherhood as Ezio Auditore sits and gathers information about Cesare Borgia, from a hooded man who is later revealed to be Leonardo da Vinci. It is available for purchase on Xbox Live, PlayStation Store and iTunes Store.[72]

Assassin's Creed: Embers
Embers is an animated short film created by UbiWorkshop. The film is included as a bonus in Signature and collector's editions of Assassin's Creed: Revelations. UbiWorkShop released a teaser trailer on July 21, 2011, which was featured at Comic-Con 2011. The Embers trailer shows an older Ezio with his family. He fears someone is trying to get him.[73][74] The developers described Embers at the 2011 Comic Con, at the Assassins Creed panel as a final epilogue to Ezio's story, and although can be watched anytime, should be watched after the completion of Assassin's Creed: Revelations story, to fully understand and complete the tale of Ezio Auditore da Firenze.[75]

The short film follows an elderly Ezio, living a peaceful life in the Tuscan countryside with his wife Sofia and his children Flavia and Marcello and writing his memoirs. One day a stranger appears, a Chinese female Assassin called Shao Jun, who came to Ezio in order to seek knowledge of his life as an Assassin. Although Ezio prefers that Jun not stay, due to his desire to leave his days as an Assassin behind, Sofia allows her to stay for the night. The next day, Ezio catches Jun reading his memoirs and bids her to leave, but relents after she asks him about what it means to be an Assassin. While on a trip to Firenze, Ezio then recounts his story of how his father and brothers were executed in the town square, forcing him to become an Assassin, and how such a life is defined by the pain it brings and causes. As they leave, the two are attacked by a stranger, who appears to be of Asian origin as well. After killing him, Jun reveals that she was a former concubine, now on the run from servants of the Chinese Zhengde Emperor, and explains how her former master rescued her from his influence. After returning to his home, Ezio tells Sofia and his children to leave, knowing that others would come. He then teaches Jun the key to liberating her people from the Emperor's influence. Later that night, Ezio's villa is attacked by more of Shao Jun's enemies, and after a fight, he successfully eliminates them all. The next morning, Ezio hands Shao Jun a small box and tells her it may come to use one day, but only if "you lose your way". He then sends her away as two riders appear at the villa. Sometime afterward Ezio journeys to Firenze with his wife Sofia and their daughter Flavia, despite suffering from heart problems. While resting on a bench and after having a short conversation with a young man with a scar on his face, similar to the sort of man he used to be, he exhales and dies in view of his family. The film then ends as a final letter from Ezio to Sofia is read, saying that of all the things that kept him going throughout life, love for the world around him was the strongest of them all.

Novels
Main article: Assassin's Creed (book series)
Assassin's Creed: Renaissance
Assassin's Creed: Renaissance is a novel based on the Assassin's Creed series written by Oliver Bowden and published by Penguin Books. It is a novelised version of the game Assassin's Creed II; however, rather than spanning a vast period of time, it is set only in the 15th century with no mention of the game's present-day events.

Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood
Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood is a continuation of the Assassin's Creed series written by Oliver Bowden and published by Penguin Books. It is a novelized version of the game Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood just like its previous book. Also, it does not contain any of the game's present-day events including Desmond, only a reference to a "phantom" by Ezio. Unlike the events of the game which start in 1499, this version of the story starts in 1503.

Assassin's Creed: The Secret Crusade
Assassin's Creed: The Secret Crusade is the third Assassin's Creed book by Oliver Bowden and published by Penguin Books. The story is told by Niccol Polo, father of Marco Polo, and is about the life of Alta?r ibn la-Ahad. It was released on June 20, 2011.[76]

Assassin's Creed: Revelations
Assassin's Creed: Revelations is the fourth novel in the continuation of the Assassin's Creed series written by Oliver Bowden and published by Penguin Books. The novel release date is November 24, 2011 for the United Kingdom and November 29, 2011 for the North America. Like the previous novels of Renaissance and Brotherhood, it is a novelised version of the game Assassin's Creed: Revelations. Additionally like the prior novels, it does not contain any of the game's present-day events including Desmond. Like the game, Ezio Auditore must leave his life behind in search of answers, in search of the truth. In Assassin's Creed: Revelations, master assassin Ezio Auditore walks in the footsteps of the legendary mentor Altair, on a journey of discovery and revelation. It is a perilous pathone that will take Ezio to Constantinople, the heart of the Ottoman Empire, where a growing army of Templars threatens to destabilise the region.[77]

Assassin's Creed: Forsaken
Assassin's Creed: Forsaken is a continuation of the Assassin's Creed series written by Oliver Bowden. It covers the life of Haytham Kenway during his years before and during the events of Assassin's Creed III.

Assassin's Creed: Black Flag
Assassin's Creed: Black Flag is a continuation of the Assassin's Creed series written by Oliver Bowden. The novel chronicles the events of the game with the same name. It was released on November 7, 2013.

Assassin's Creed: Unity
Assassin's Creed: Unity is a continuation of the Assassin's Creed series written by Oliver Bowden. The novel focuses on the events of the game from Elise's perspective, and then Arno's perspective after Elise's death at the hands of Templar Grand Master Fran?ois-Thomas Germain, who was later killed by Arno. It was released on November 20, 2014.

Assassin's Creed: Underworld
Assassin's Creed Underworld unveils the story of Master Assassin Henry Green/Jayadeep Mir, the son of Indian Master Assassin Arbaaz Mir and his wife Pyara Kaur (the two debuted in Assassin's Creed:Brahman), six years before the events depicted in Assassin's Creed: Syndicate.

Books
Assassin's Creed: Encyclopedia
UbiWorkshop released an encyclopedia of the Assassin's Creed series in 2011. Initially intended as an art book, the project gathered so much material that the company decided to expand it into an encyclopedia. It will still feature works of artists, such as Craig Mullins, Tavis Coburn, 123Klan, Gabz and James NG. Artists were given creative freedom, as they were able to create a unique Assassin from the period of their choosing. The art book contains a "carte blanche" section, which is going to contain fan-submitted artwork. The original cost of this is $39.95.[78][79]

In November 2012, to coincide with the release of Assassin's Creed III, UbiWorkshop released a second edition of the encyclopedia. This Edition contained an additional 120 new pages of content, covering both Assassin's Creed III and Assassin's Creed: The Chain, as well as revised content based on feedback.[80]

The Third Edition of the Assassin's Creed Encyclopedia is an updated hardcover edition incorporating information of characters and events from Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag and Assassin's Creed: Brahman along with new artwork and concept art. It was released worldwide on November 11, 2013 and includes 390 pages of new content and a revised version of the second edition, which is also available to purchase from UbiWorkshop.[81]

In other media
In the 2009 Wii game Academy of Champions: Soccer, Alta?r appears as a playable character along with other Ubisoft characters.[82] In the 2012 game Soulcalibur V, Ezio appears as a playable fighter.[83] Sackboy, the player character from LittleBigPlanet and its sequel, can be costumed as Ezio.[84] In Prince of Persia: The Forgotten Sands there is an unlockable outfit through Uplay.[85] In Prince of Persia (2008), Alta?r's Costume can be unlocked with a code obtained by pre-ordering the game.[citation needed] Final Fantasy XIII-2 has a costume of Ezio from Assassin's Creed: Revelations as an optional costume option as DLC.[86] In PC/Mac versions of Team Fortress 2, two promotional items were introduced in 2011 months before Assassin's Creed: Revelations' release. These were both for the class Spy, the first item being the iconic hidden blade, the second a hood based on the one Ezio wore in Revelations.[citation needed] In Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots, the outfit of Alta?r is available as an unlockable, though, originally, it was only an April Fools joke by Hideo Kojima.[citation needed] In the 2011 Indian film Velayudham, the superhero costume worn by the protagonist is visibly based on Alta?r's in Assassin's Creed.[87][88]

Reception
Aggregate review scores
As of December 4, 2015.
Game	Metacritic
Assassin's Creed	(PC) 79[89]
(PS3) 81[90]
(X360) 81[91]
Assassin's Creed: Alta?r's Chronicles	(NDS) 58[92]
Assassin's Creed: Bloodlines	(PSP) 63[93]
Assassin's Creed II	(PC) 86[94]
(PS3) 91[95]
(X360) 90[96]
Assassin's Creed II: Discovery	(NDS) 69[97]
Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood	(PC) 88[98]
(PS3) 90[99]
(X360) 89[100]
Assassin's Creed: Revelations	(PC) 80[101]
(PS3) 80[102]
(X360) 80[103]
Assassin's Creed III	(PC) 80[104]
(PS3) 85[105]
(WIIU) 85[106]
(X360) 84[107]
Assassin's Creed III: Liberation	(PC) 66[108]
(PS3) 64[109]
(Vita) 70[110]
(X360) 62[111]
Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag	(PC) 84[112]
(PS3) 88[113]
(PS4) 83[114]
(WIIU) 86[115]
(X360) 86[116]
Assassin's Creed Rogue	(PC) 74[117]
(PS3) 72[118]
(X360) 72[119]
Assassin's Creed Unity	(PC) 70[120]
(PS4) 70[121]
(XONE) 72[122]
Assassin's Creed Syndicate	(PC) 75[123]
(PS4) 76[124]
(XONE) 78[125]
The Assassin's Creed series, particularly the main games, have received mainly positive reviews from fans and critics, many of whom have called Assassin's Creed "...the standout series on [the seventh generation] of consoles".[126] The series has sold over 73 million copies as of April 2014.[127]

References
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Altair's Chronicles for Palm Pre". Gameloft. Retrieved December 26, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Facts & Figures". Ubisoft. Retrieved April 21, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Interview: Assassin's Creed". CVG. Retrieved September 2, 2012.
Jump up ^ "The Making Of: Assassins Creed". EDGE. August 27, 2012. Archived from the original on December 23, 2013. Retrieved March 3, 2013.
Jump up ^ Bryan Vore (March 4, 2013). "Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag". Gameinformer.com. Retrieved March 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ George, Richard (March 4, 2013). "The Dawn of Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag". IGN. Retrieved August 30, 2013.
Jump up ^ "GameStop Placeholder Art Names Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood C Update". Kotaku.com. May 5, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
Jump up ^ Harman, Stace (March 27, 2012). "Connor goes loud: Assassins Creed III gets first showing". VG247. Retrieved June 19, 2012.
^ Jump up to: a b Schreier, Jason (March 19, 2014). "Leaked Images Reveal One Of This Fall's Two Assassin's Creed Games". Kotaku. Retrieved March 19, 2014.
Jump up ^ Schreier, Jason (March 27, 2014). "Sources: Assassin's Creed Comet Will Let You Play As A Templar". Kotaku. Retrieved March 27, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b McWhertor, Michael (August 5, 2014). "Assassin's Creed Rogue confirmed by Ubisoft - here's the first trailer". Polygon. Retrieved August 5, 2014.
Jump up ^ Wallace, Kimberly (August 5, 2014). "September Cover Revealed C Assassin's Creed Rogue And Unity". Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved August 5, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b Karmali, Luke (August 28, 2014). "Assassin's Creed Unity Release Date Delayed To November". IGN. Retrieved August 28, 2014.
Jump up ^ Futter, Mike (October 13, 2014). "Assassins Creed Rogue Coming To PC In 2015". Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved October 13, 2014.
Jump up ^ Karmali, Luke (March 21, 2014). "Ubisoft Confirms Assassin's Creed: Unity, Release Date Teased". IGN. Retrieved March 21, 2014.
Jump up ^ Jackson, Leah B. (June 9, 2014). "E3 2014: Assassin's Creed Unity Co-Op Revealed". IGN. Retrieved June 9, 2014.
Jump up ^ Lien, Tracey (June 9, 2014). "Assassin's Creed Unity hits Oct. 28, pre-orders live". Polygon. Retrieved June 9, 2014.
Jump up ^ Schreier, Jason (December 1, 2014). "Next Year's Big Assassin's Creed Is Set In Victorian London [UPDATE]". Kotaku. Retrieved December 4, 2014.
Jump up ^ Schreier, Jason. "Next Assassin's Creed To Be Announced Next Week; Now Called Syndicate". Retrieved May 7, 2015.
Jump up ^ Sarker, Samit (May 12, 2015). "Assassin's Creed Syndicate announced, set in Victorian London". Polygon. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
Jump up ^ Phillips, Tom (May 12, 2015). "Assassin's Creed: Syndicate launches 23rd October on PS4, Xbox One". Eurogamer. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Recollection for iPhone 3GS, iPhone 4, iPhone 4S, iPhone 5, iPod touch (2nd generation), iPod touch (3rd generation), iPod touch (4th generation), iPod touch (5th generation), and iPad on the iTunes App Store". itunes.apple.com. August 18, 2012. Retrieved November 30, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Rearmed for iPhone 3GS, iPhone 4, iPhone 4S, iPod touch (2nd generation), iPod touch (3rd generation), iPod touch (4th generation) and iPad on the iTunes App Store". Itunes.apple.com. May 3, 2012. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Sony announces white PS Vita bundle with Assassin's Creed III: Liberation". Engadget. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Gamescom: Assassin's Creed, Rayman on Vita - PSP News at IGN". Psp.ign.com. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ Lewis, Anne (October 24, 2013). "ASSASSINS CREED LIBERATION HD C RELEASE DATE AND PRE-ORDER BONUSES". UbiBlog. Ubisoft. Retrieved October 24, 2013.
Jump up ^ Goldfarb, Andrew (November 25, 2013). "Assassins Creed Pirates Release Date, Price Announced". IGN. Retrieved November 26, 2013.
Jump up ^ Goldfarb, Andrew (September 10, 2013). "Assassins Creed Liberation HD, Pirates Announced". IGN. Retrieved September 10, 2013.
Jump up ^ Futter, Mike (September 10, 2013). "Assassin's Creed: Pirates Brings The High Seas To Small Devices". Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved September 10, 2013.
Jump up ^ Miller, Matt (August 21, 2014). "Assassins Creed Memories Launches On iOS". Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved August 22, 2014.
Jump up ^ Marchiafavra, Jeff (September 22, 2014). "Assassin's Creed Unity Season Pass Includes Newly Announced 2.5D Downloadable Title". Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved September 22, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Chronicles Trilogy Announced". IGN. 2014-03-31. Retrieved 2014-03-31.
Jump up ^ Sinha, Robin (October 1, 2014). "Ubisoft Unveils Assassin's Creed Identity for IPhone and IPad". NDTV Gadgets. NDTV Convergence Limited. Retrieved October 16, 2014.
Jump up ^ Philips, Tom. "Assassin's Creed: Lost Legacy canned". Eurogamer.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Utopia geannuleerd". Gamer.nl. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
Jump up ^ "GREE: GREE and Ubisoft? Team Up to Deliver New Assassin's Creed Mobile Game". Retrieved October 6, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Eurogamer: Assassin's Creed: Utopia won't link with AC3 beyond story". Eurogamer.net. June 21, 2012. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b "Eurogamer: Assassin's Creed Utopia is a city-building battler". Eurogamer.net. September 6, 2012. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
Jump up ^ Bramwell, Tom (October 14, 2009). "Ubi: We could do 35 Assassin's Creeds News ? News ?". Eurogamer.net. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ Ivan, Tom (June 11, 2012). "News: Ubisoft 'hopes to reach Assassin's Creed 10'". ComputerAndVideoGames.com. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ "AC:3 Possible Locations Named In Survey". CVG. November 29, 2011. Retrieved November 30, 2011.
Jump up ^ Dutton, Fred (April 4, 2012). "Ubisoft: WW2, Japan and Egypt would make dismal Assassin's Creed locations". Eurogamer.net. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ Makuch, Eddie. "India-set Assassin's Creed on Ubisoft's radar". GameSpot.
Jump up ^ Totilo, Stephen (June 14, 2013). "Ubisoft Has Three Assassin's Creeds in Development, Vows Innovation". Retrieved June 14, 2013.
Jump up ^ Tom Phillips (August 5, 2013). ""There is an end" to the Assassin's Creed series, Ubisoft says". Eurogamer. Retrieved August 5, 2013.
Jump up ^ Mitch Dyer (October 10, 2013). "Assassin's Creed 4 Director on Egypt Setting, Future of Franchise". IGN. Retrieved October 10, 2013.
Jump up ^ Watts, Steve (May 15, 2014). "Assassin's Creed Games Coming To PS3, Xbox 360 For 'Foreseeable Future'". IGN. Retrieved May 16, 2014.
Jump up ^ "A MESSAGE FROM THE ASSASSINS CREED TEAM". Ubisoft. February 11, 2016. Retrieved February 11, 2016.
Jump up ^ Macy, Seth G. (February 11, 2016). "UBISOFT CONFIRMS NO ASSASSIN'S CREED THIS YEAR". IGN. Retrieved February 11, 2016.
Jump up ^ "The French getting Assassin's Creed comic". News.bigdownload.com. October 28, 2009. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed : Desmond C Trailer de la bande dessine". YouTube. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Ubisoft Says "Yes Russian" for New Assassin's Creed Comic Book | Ripten Video Game Blog". Ripten.com. July 15, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
Jump up ^ Tom Magrino (July 15, 2010). "Assassin's Creed comics due this fall". gamespot.com. Retrieved July 15, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Assassins's Creed: The Fall comic to be published by Wildstorm in November". News.bigdownload.com. August 17, 2010. Archived from the original on October 21, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
Jump up ^ Haas, Pete (May 26, 2012). "Assassin's Creed: The Chain Will Prepare You For Assassin's Creed 3". Retrieved June 6, 2012.
Jump up ^ George, Richard (July 19, 2013). "New Assassin's Creed Graphic Novel Debuts Indian Assassin". IGN. Retrieved July 19, 2013.
Jump up ^ Moser, Cassidee (August 31, 2015). "Assassin's Creed Comic Issue #1 Covers Revealed - IGN". Ca.ign.com. Retrieved December 24, 2015.
Jump up ^ Tony 'G-Man' Guerrero on August 31, 2015 (August 31, 2015). "ASSASSIN'S CREED #1 Covers Revealed". Comic Vine. Retrieved December 24, 2015.
Jump up ^ Osborn, Alex (August 28, 2015). "ASSASSIN'S CREED MOVIE FEATURES SHARED UNIVERSE WITH GAMES". IGN. Retrieved August 28, 2015.
Jump up ^ Tom Phillips (January 6, 2015). "Assassin's Creed film now due Christmas 2016". Eurogamer. Retrieved January 6, 2015.
Jump up ^ Graser, Marc (October 20, 2011). "Sony breeds 'Creed'". Variety. Retrieved August 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ Wigler, Josh (July 9, 2012). "Michael Fassbender To Star In Assassins Creed". MTV. Retrieved August 10, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b Doty, Meriah (August 27, 2015). "'Assassin's Creed' First Look: Here's Michael Fassbender as Brand New Character (Exclusive)". Yahoo. Retrieved August 27, 2015.
Jump up ^ Graser, Marc (October 22, 2012). "New Regency, Fox partner on Ubisofts Assassins Creed". Variety. Retrieved August 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ Siegel, Tatiana (January 14, 2013). "New Regency and Ubisoft Tap Brit Writer for 'Assassin's Creed' Film (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved August 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ Vejvoda, Jim (August 16, 2013). "Scott Frank Rewriting Assassin's Creed Movie". IGN. Retrieved August 16, 2013.
Jump up ^ Fleming Jr., Mike (April 7, 2014). "Exodus Scribes Adam Cooper & Bill Collage Take Assassins Creed". Deadline.com. Retrieved April 7, 2014.
Jump up ^ Fleming, Jr., Mike (April 29, 2014). "Michael Fassbender Poised To Re-Team With Macbeth Helmer On Assassins Creed". Deadline.com. Retrieved April 29, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Big screen adaptation of Assassin's Creed starts shooting in Malta". timesofmalta.com. September 3, 2015. Retrieved September 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ Lee, Chris (December 9, 2015). "Michael Fassbender was playing the hero in Assassin's Creed when he nabbed a SAG Award nomination". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 10, 2015.
Jump up ^ Jayson, Jay (January 15, 2016). "Assassin's Creed Movie Starring Michael Fassbender Wraps Filming". Comic Book.
Jump up ^ "Ubisoft preps animated Assassin's Creed short". Gamespot.com. November 12, 2010. Archived from the original on November 15, 2010. Retrieved November 13, 2010.
Jump up ^ chrislewis (July 25, 2011). "Assassin's Creed Embers, UbiWorkshop blog". Ubiworkshop.com. Retrieved September 13, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassins Creed Embers Debut Trailer [HD]". YouTube. Retrieved September 13, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Comic-con 2011 Panel: Assassin's Creed: The Creation of a Universe (PlayStation 3) C GameSpot Video". Gamespot.com. Retrieved September 13, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: The Secret Crusade". Retrieved May 31, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Revelations - Oliver Bowden - Penguin Books". Penguin.co.uk. November 24, 2011. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Artists for hire". Ubiworkshop.com. Archived from the original on August 22, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Your face-stabbing art could be featured in Assassin's Creed art book". GamesRadar.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed - Encyclopedia: Second Edition - UbiWorkshop". UbiWorkshop Store. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed - Encyclopedia-Third Edition". UbiWorkshop Store.
Jump up ^ Rositano, Joseph (September 22, 2009). "Academy of Champions Soccer Review". PALGN.
Jump up ^ Plunkett, Luke (October 21, 2011). "Yup, Ezio is in Soulcalibur V". Kotaku.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed? II Costume - LittleBigPlanet?". Littlebigplanet.com. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Uplay - Prince of Persia: The Forgotten Sands". Retrieved September 21, 2012.
Jump up ^ Marshall Honorof. "The Escapist : News : Assassin's Creed's Ezio Joins the Party in Final Fantasy XIII-2". Escapistmagazine.com. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ Sudhish Kamath (November 6, 2011). "Tale of three superheroes". The Hindu. Retrieved December 5, 2011.
Jump up ^ Ranjitha G (September 19, 2011). "Poster rip offs". The Times of India. Retrieved November 4, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Director's Cut Edition Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Alta?r's Chronicles Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Bloodlines Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed II Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed II Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed II Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed II: Discovery Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Revelations Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Revelations Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Revelations Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed III Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed III Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed III Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed III Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Liberation HD Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 27, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Liberation HD Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 27, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed III: Liberation Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 17, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Liberation HD Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 27, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Rogue Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Rogue Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Rogue Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Unity Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved November 12, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Unity Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved November 12, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Unity Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved November 12, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Syndicate Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved January 13, 2016.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Syndicate Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved January 13, 2016.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Syndicate Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved November 14, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's creed 3 Review". Blast. Retrieved November 11, 2012.
Jump up ^ Futter, Mike (April 21, 2014). "Assassins Creed Reaches 73 Million Copies Sold Across Franchise". Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved April 21, 2014.
External links
	Wikiquote has quotations related to: Assassin's Creed (video game series)
	Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Assassin's Creed Tour.
Official website
The Assassin's Creed Wiki
[show] v t e
Assassin's Creed
[show] v t e
Ubisoft
Categories: Assassin's Creed2012 in fictionAction-adventure gamesAlternate history video gamesAncient astronauts in fictionApocalyptic video gamesArtificial intelligence in fictionHistorical fictionOpen world video gamesPanhistorical video gamesParkour video gamesScience fiction video gamesStealth video gamesVideo game franchises introduced in 2007Virtual reality in fictionAssassinations in fictionVideo games with historical settingsMedia franchisesVideo games adapted into comicsVideo games adapted into novelsVideo games adapted into films
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikivoyage
Languages
???????
Az?rbaycanca
?????
Catal
?e?tina
?
Espa?ol
?????
Fran?ais
???
???????
Italiano
?????
???????
Nederlands
Z
Norsk bokm?l
Polski
Portugus
Roman?

Sloven?ina
 / srpski
Suomi
Svenska
???
Trk?e
?
Ti?ng Vi?t

Edit links
This page was last modified on 25 July 2016, at 18:57.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
 Page semi-protected
Mao Zedong
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Mao" redirects here. For other uses, see Mao (disambiguation).

This article may be too long to read and navigate comfortably. Please consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding or removing subheadings. (June 2016)
This is a Chinese name; the family name is Mao.
Chairman
Mao Zedong

Mao Zedong portrait.jpg
Official portrait of Mao Zedong which hangs at Tiananmen
1st Chairman of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
In office
June 19, 1945 C September 9, 1976
1st vice-chairman	Liu Shaoqi
Lin Biao
Zhou Enlai
Hua Guofeng
Preceded by	Himself (as Central Politburo Chairman)
Succeeded by	Hua Guofeng
1st Chairman of the Central Politburo of the Communist Party of China
In office
March 20, 1943 C April 24, 1969
Preceded by	Zhang Wentian
(as Central Committee General Secretary)
Succeeded by	Himself (as Central Committee Chairman)
Chairman of the CPC Central Military Commission
In office
August 23, 1945 C September 21, 1949
September 8, 1954 C September 9, 1976
Preceded by	Position created
Succeeded by	Hua Guofeng
1st Chairman of the National Committee of the CPPCC
In office
September 21, 1949 C December 25, 1954
Honorary Chairman
December 25, 1954 C September 9, 1976
Preceded by	Position created
Succeeded by	Zhou Enlai
1st Chairman of the People's Republic of China
In office
September 27, 1954 C April 27, 1959
Premier	Zhou Enlai
Deputy	Zhu De
Preceded by	Position created
Succeeded by	Liu Shaoqi
Member of the
National People's Congress
In office
September 15, 1954 C April 18, 1959
December 21, 1964 C September 9, 1976
Constituency	Beijing At-large
Personal details
Born	December 26, 1893
Shaoshan, Hunan, China
Died	September 9, 1976 (aged 82)
Beijing, China
Resting place	Chairman Mao Memorial Hall, Beijing, China
Nationality	Chinese
Political party	Communist Party of China
Other political
affiliations	Kuomintang (1925-1926)
Spouse(s)	Luo Yixiu (1907C1910)
Yang Kaihui (1920C1930)
He Zizhen (1930C1937)
Jiang Qing (1939C1976)
Children	10
Alma mater	Hunan First Normal University
Occupation	Revolutionary, statesman
Signature	
Mao Zedong
Mao Zedong (Chinese characters).svg
"Mao Zedong" in Simplified (top) and Traditional (bottom) Chinese characters
Simplified Chinese	
Traditional Chinese	|
[show]Transcriptions
Mao Zedong or Mao Tse-tung (Listeni/?ma? z??d??, dz?-/; December 26, 1893 C September 9, 1976), also known as Chairman Mao, was a Chinese communist revolutionary and founding father of the People's Republic of China, which he ruled as an autocrat styled the Chairman of the Communist Party of China from its establishment in 1949, until his death in 1976. His MarxistCLeninist theories, military strategies, and political policies are collectively known as Maoism or Marxism-Leninism-Maoism.

Born the son of a wealthy farmer in Shaoshan, Hunan, Mao adopted a Chinese nationalist and anti-imperialist outlook in early life, particularly influenced by the events of the Xinhai Revolution of 1911 and May Fourth Movement of 1919. Mao adopted MarxismCLeninism while working at Peking University and became a founding member of the Communist Party of China (CPC), leading the Autumn Harvest Uprising in 1927. During the Chinese Civil War between the Guomindang (GMD) and the CPC, Mao helped to found the Red Army, led the Jiangxi Soviet's radical land policies and ultimately became head of the CPC during the Long March. Although the CPC temporarily allied with the GMD under the United Front during the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937C45), after Japan's defeat China's civil war resumed and in 1949 Mao's forces defeated the Nationalists who withdrew to Taiwan.

On October 1, 1949, Mao proclaimed the foundation of the People's Republic of China (PRC), a one-party state controlled by the CPC. In the following years Mao solidified his control through land reform campaigns against landlords, and perceived enemies of the state he termed as "counter-revolutionaries". In 1957, he launched the Great Leap Forward campaign that aimed to rapidly transform China's economy from an agrarian economy to an industrial one. The campaign contributed to a widespread famine, whose death toll is estimated at between 15 and 45 million. In 1966, he initiated the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, a program to remove "counter-revolutionary" elements of Chinese society that lasted 10 years and which was marked by violent class struggle, widespread destruction of cultural artifacts and unprecedented elevation of Mao's personality cult.[1] In 1972, Mao welcomed American President Richard Nixon in Beijing, signalling a policy of opening China, which was furthered under the rule of Deng Xiaoping (1978C1992). Mao suffered a series of heart attacks in 1976, dying in that September, aged 82. He was succeeded as Paramount leader by Hua Guofeng (1976C1978), who was quickly sidelined and replaced by Deng.

A controversial figure, Mao is regarded as one of the most important individuals in modern world history,[2] and is also known as a theorist, military strategist, poet and visionary.[3] Supporters credit him with driving imperialism out of China,[4] modernising China and building it into a world power, promoting the status of women, improving education and health care, and increasing life expectancy as China's population grew from around 550 million to over 900 million during the period of his leadership.[5][6] In contrast, critics consider him a dictator comparable to Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin who severely damaged traditional Chinese culture, as well as a perpetrator of systematic human rights abuses who was responsible for an estimated 40 to 70 million deaths through starvation, forced labour and executions, ranking his tenure as the top incidence of democide in human history.[7][8][9]

Contents  [hide] 
1	Early life
1.1	Youth and the Xinhai Revolution: 1893C1911
1.2	Fourth Normal School of Changsha: 1912C19
2	Early revolutionary activity
2.1	Beijing, Anarchism, and Marxism: 1917C19
2.2	New Culture and political protests, 1919C20
2.3	Founding the Communist Party of China: 1921C22
2.4	Collaboration with the Kuomintang: 1922C27
3	Civil War
3.1	The Nanchang and Autumn Harvest Uprisings: 1927
3.2	Base in Jinggangshan: 1927C1928
3.3	Jiangxi Soviet Republic of China: 1929C1934
3.4	The Long March: 1934C1935
3.5	Alliance with the Kuomintang: 1935C1940
3.6	Resuming civil war: 1940C1949
4	Leadership of China
4.1	Great Leap Forward
4.2	Consequences
4.3	Split from Soviet Union
4.4	Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution
4.4.1	"Mango fever"
4.4.2	End of the Cultural Revolution
5	State visits
6	Death and aftermath
7	Legacy
7.1	Public image
8	Genealogy
8.1	Ancestors
8.2	Wives
8.3	Siblings
8.4	Children
9	Personal life
10	Writings and calligraphy
10.1	Literary works
11	Portrayal in film and television
12	Mao and Tibet
13	See also
14	References
14.1	Citations
15	Further reading
16	External links
16.1	General
16.2	Commentary
Early life
Main article: Early life of Mao Zedong
Youth and the Xinhai Revolution: 1893C1911
Mao Zedong was born on December 26, 1893 in Shaoshan village, Hunan Province, China.[10] His father, Mao Yichang, was a formerly impoverished peasant who had become one of the wealthiest farmers in Shaoshan. Growing up in rural Hunan, Mao Zedong described his father as a stern disciplinarian, who would beat him and his three siblings, the boys Zemin and Zetan, and an adopted girl, Zejian.[11] Mao's mother, Wen Qimei, was a devout Buddhist who tried to temper her husband's strict attitude.[12] Zedong too became a Buddhist, but abandoned this faith in his mid-teenage years.[12] At age 8, Mao was sent to Shaoshan Primary School. Learning the value systems of Confucianism, he later admitted that he didn't enjoy the classical Chinese texts preaching Confucian morals, instead favouring popular novels like Romance of the Three Kingdoms and Water Margin.[13] At age 13, Mao finished primary education, and his father united him in an arranged marriage to the 17-year-old Luo Yigu, thereby uniting their land-owning families. Mao refused to recognise her as his wife, becoming a fierce critic of arranged marriage and temporarily moving away. Luo was locally disgraced and died in 1910.[14]


Mao's childhood home in Shaoshan, in 2010, by which time it had become a tourist destination.
While working on his father's farm, Mao read voraciously,[15] and developed a "political consciousness" from Zheng Guanying's booklet which lamented the deterioration of Chinese power and argued for the adoption of representative democracy.[16] Interested in history, Mao was inspired by the military prowess and nationalistic fervour of George Washington and Napoleon Bonaparte.[17] His political views were shaped by Gelaohui-led protests which erupted following a famine in Hunanese capital Changsha; Mao supported the protesters' demands, but the armed forces suppressed the dissenters and executed their leaders.[18] The famine spread to Shaoshan, where starving peasants seized his father's grain. He disapproved of their actions as morally wrong, but claimed sympathy for their situation.[19] At age 16, Mao moved to a higher primary school in nearby Dongshan,[20] where he was bullied for his peasant background.[21]

In 1911, Mao began middle school in Changsha.[22] Revolutionary sentiment was strong in the city, where there was widespread animosity towards Emperor Puyi's absolute monarchy and many were advocating republicanism. The republicans' figurehead was Sun Yat-sen, an American-educated Christian who led the Tongmenghui society.[23] In Changsha, Mao was influenced by Sun's newspaper, The People's Independence (Minli bao),[24] and called for Sun to become president in a school essay.[25] As a symbol of rebellion against the Manchu monarch, Mao and a friend cut off their queue pigtails, a sign of subservience to the emperor.[26]

Inspired by Sun's republicanism, the army rose up across southern China, sparking the Xinhai Revolution. Changsha's governor fled, leaving the city in republican control.[27] Supporting the revolution, Mao joined the rebel army as a private soldier, but was not involved in fighting. The northern provinces remained loyal to the emperor, and hoping to avoid a civil war, Sunproclaimed "provisional president" by his supporterscompromised with the monarchist general Yuan Shikai. The monarchy would be abolished, creating the Republic of China, but the monarchist Yuan would become president. The revolution over, Mao resigned from the army in 1912, after six months as a soldier.[28] Around this time, Mao discovered socialism from a newspaper article; proceeding to read pamphlets by Jiang Kanghu, the student founder of the Chinese Socialist Party, Mao remained interested yet unconvinced by the idea.[29]

Fourth Normal School of Changsha: 1912C19
Over the next few years, Mao enrolled and dropped out of a police academy, a soap-production school, a law school, an economics school, and the government-run Changsha Middle School.[30] Studying independently, he spent much time in Changsha's library, reading core works of classical liberalism such as Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations and Montesquieu's The Spirit of the Laws, as well as the works of western scientists and philosophers such as Darwin, Mill, Rousseau, and Spencer.[31] Viewing himself as an intellectual, years later he admitted that at this time he thought himself better than working people.[32] He was inspired by Friedrich Paulsen, whose liberal emphasis on individualism led Mao to believe that strong individuals were not bound by moral codes but should strive for the greater good, and that the "end justifies the means" conclusion of Consequentialism.[33] His father saw no use in his son's intellectual pursuits, cut off his allowance, and forced him to move into a hostel for the destitute.[34]


Mao in 1913
Mao desired to become a teacher and enrolled at the Fourth Normal School of Changsha, which soon merged with the First Normal School of Changsha, widely seen as the best in Hunan.[35] Befriending Mao, professor Yang Changji urged him to read a radical newspaper, New Youth (Xin qingnian), the creation of his friend Chen Duxiu, a dean at Peking University. Although a Chinese nationalist, Chen argued that China must look to the west to cleanse itself of superstition and autocracy.[36] Mao published his first article in New Youth in April 1917, instructing readers to increase their physical strength to serve the revolution.[37] He joined the Society for the Study of Wang Fuzhi (Chuan-shan Hseh-she), a revolutionary group founded by Changsha literati who wished to emulate the philosopher Wang Fuzhi.[38]

In his first school year, Mao befriended an older student, Xiao Zisheng; together they went on a walking tour of Hunan, begging and writing literary couplets to obtain food.[39] A popular student, in 1915 Mao was elected secretary of the Students Society. He organized the Association for Student Self-Government and led protests against school rules.[40] In spring 1917, he was elected to command the students' volunteer army, set up to defend the school from marauding soldiers.[41] Increasingly interested in the techniques of war, he took a keen interest in World War I, and also began to develop a sense of solidarity with workers.[42] Mao undertook feats of physical endurance with Xiao Zisheng and Cai Hesen, and with other young revolutionaries they formed the Renovation of the People Study Society in April 1918 to debate Chen Duxiu's ideas. Desiring personal and societal transformation, the Society gained 70C80 members, many of whom would later join the Communist Party.[43] Mao graduated in June 1919, ranked third in the year.[44]

Early revolutionary activity
Main article: Early revolutionary activity of Mao Zedong
Beijing, Anarchism, and Marxism: 1917C19


Following the success of the October Revolution in the former Russian Empire, in which Marxists took power, Mao came under the theoretical influence of Karl Marx (left) and Vladimir Lenin (right).
Mao moved to Beijing, where his mentor Yang Changji had taken a job at Peking University.[45] Yang thought Mao exceptionally "intelligent and handsome",[46] securing him a job as assistant to the university librarian Li Dazhao, an early Chinese Communist.[47] Li authored a series of New Youth articles on the October Revolution in Russia, during which the Communist Bolshevik Party under the leadership of Vladimir Lenin had seized power. Lenin was an advocate of the socio-political theory of Marxism, first developed by the German sociologists Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, and Li's articles brought an understanding of Marxism to the Chinese revolutionary movement.[48] Becoming "more and more radical", Mao was influenced by Peter Kropotkin's anarchism but joined Li's Study Group and "developed rapidly toward Marxism" during the winter of 1919.[49]

Paid a low wage, Mao lived in a cramped room with seven other Hunanese students, but believed that Beijing's beauty offered "vivid and living compensation".[50] At the university, Mao was widely snubbed by other students due to his rural Hunanese accent and lowly position. He joined the university's Philosophy and Journalism Societies and attended lectures and seminars by the likes of Chen Duxiu, Hu Shi, and Qian Xuantong.[51] Mao's time in Beijing ended in the spring of 1919, when he travelled to Shanghai with friends from where he departed for France.[52] He did not return to Shaoshan, where his mother was terminally ill. She died in October 1919, with her husband dying in January 1920.[53]

New Culture and political protests, 1919C20
On May 4, 1919, students in Beijing gathered at the Gate of Heavenly Peace to protest the Chinese government's weak resistance to Japanese expansion in China. Patriots were outraged at the influence given to Japan in the Twenty-One Demands in 1915, the complicity of Duan Qiruis Beiyang Government, and the betrayal of China in the Treaty of Versailles, wherein Japan was allowed to receive territories in Shandong which had been surrendered by Germany. These demonstrations ignited the nation-wide May Fourth Movement and fueled the New Culture Movement which blamed Chinas diplomatic defeats on social and cultural backwardness.[54]

In Changsha, Mao had begun teaching history at the Xiuye Primary School[55] and organizing protests against the pro-Duan Governor of Hunan Province, Zhang Jingyao, popularly known as "Zhang the Venomous" due to his corrupt and violent rule.[56] In late May, Mao co-founded the Hunanese Student Association with He Shuheng and Deng Zhongxia, organizing a student strike for June and in July 1919 began production of a weekly radical magazine, Xiang River Review (Xiangjiang pinglun). Using vernacular language that would be understandable to the majority of China's populace, he advocated the need for a "Great Union of the Popular Masses", strengthened trade unions able to wage non-violent revolution.[clarification needed] His ideas were not Marxist, but heavily influenced by Kropotkin's concept of mutual aid.[57]


Students in Beijing rallied during the May Fourth Movement.
Zhang banned the Student Association, but Mao continued publishing after assuming editorship of the liberal magazine New Hunan (Xin Hunan) and offered articles in popular local newspaper Justice (Ta Kung Po). Several of these advocated feminist views, calling for the liberation of women in Chinese society; Mao was influenced by his forced arranged-marriage.[58] In December 1919, Mao helped organise a general strike in Hunan, securing some concessions, but Mao and other student leaders felt threatened by Zhang, and Mao returned to Beijing, visiting the terminally ill Yang Changji.[59] Mao found that his articles had achieved a level of fame among the revolutionary movement, and set about soliciting support in overthrowing Zhang.[60] Coming across newly translated Marxist literature by Thomas Kirkup, Karl Kautsky, and Marx and Engelsnotably The Communist Manifestohe came under their increasing influence, but was still eclectic in his views.[61]

Mao visited Tianjin, Jinan, and Qufu,[62] before moving to Shanghai, where he worked as a laundryman and met Chen Duxiu, noting that Chen's adoption of Marxism "deeply impressed me at what was probably a critical period in my life". In Shanghai, Mao met an old teacher of his, Yi Peiji, a revolutionary and member of the Kuomintang (KMT), or Chinese Nationalist Party, which was gaining increasing support and influence. Yi introduced Mao to General Tan Yankai, a senior KMT member who held the loyalty of troops stationed along the Hunanese border with Guangdong. Tan was plotting to overthrow Zhang, and Mao aided him by organizing the Changsha students. In June 1920, Tan led his troops into Changsha, and Zhang fled. In the subsequent reorganization of the provincial administration, Mao was appointed headmaster of the junior section of the First Normal School. Now receiving a large income, he married Yang Kaihui in the winter of 1920.[63]

Founding the Communist Party of China: 1921C22

Location of the first Congress of the Chinese Communist Party in July 1921, in Xintiandi, former French Concession, Shanghai.
The Communist Party of China was founded by Chen Duxiu and Li Dazhao in the French concession of Shanghai in 1921 as a study society and informal network. Mao set up a Changsha branch, also establishing a branch of the Socialist Youth Corps. Opening a bookstore under the control of his new Cultural Book Society, its purpose was to propagate revolutionary literature throughout Hunan.[64] He was involved in the movement for Hunan autonomy, where he helped organise workers' strikes in the winter of 1920C21,[65] in the hope that a Hunanese constitution would increase civil liberties there and make his revolutionary activity easier. Although the movement was successful, in later life, he denied any involvement.[66] By 1921, small Marxist groups existed in Shanghai, Beijing, Changsha, Wuhan, Guangzhou, and Jinan; it was decided to hold a central meeting, which began in Shanghai on July 23, 1921. The first session of the National Congress of the Communist Party of China was attended by 13 delegates, Mao included. After the authorities sent a police spy to the congress, the delegates moved to a boat on South Lake near Chiahsing to escape detection. Although Soviet and Comintern delegates attended, the first congress ignored Lenin's advice to accept a temporary alliance between the Communists and the "bourgeois democrats" who also advocated national revolution; instead they stuck to the orthodox Marxist belief that only the urban proletariat could lead a socialist revolution.[67]

Mao was now party secretary for Hunan and stationed in Changsha, from which he went on a recruitment drive.[68] In August 1921, he founded the Self-Study University, through which readers could gain access to revolutionary literature, housed in the premises of the Society for the Study of Wang Fuzhi.[68] Taking part in the YMCA mass education movement to fight illiteracy, he opened a Changsha branch, though replaced the usual textbooks with revolutionary tracts in order to spread Marxism among the students.[69] He continued organizing the labour movement to strike against the administration of Hunan Governor Zhao Hengti, particularly following the execution of two anarchists.[70] In July 1922, the Second Congress of the Communist Party took place in Shanghai, though Mao lost the address and couldn't attend. Adopting Lenin's advice, the delegates agreed to an alliance with the "bourgeois democrats" of the KMT for the good of the "national revolution". Communist Party members joined the KMT, hoping to push its politics leftward.[71] Mao enthusiastically agreed with this decision, arguing for an alliance across China's socio-economic classes. Mao was a vocal anti-imperialist and in his writings he lambasted the governments of Japan, UK and US, describing the latter as "the most murderous of hangmen".[72] Mao's strategy for the successful and famous Anyuan coal mines strikes (contrary to later Party historians) depended on both "proletarian" and "bourgeois" strategies. The success depended on innovative organizing by Liu Shaoqi and Li Lisan who not only mobilised the miners, but formed schools and cooperatives. They also engaged local intellectuals, gentry, military officers, merchants, Red Gang dragon heads and church clergy in support.[73]

Collaboration with the Kuomintang: 1922C27

Mao the revolutionary in 1927.
File:Chairman Mao-1.webm
Mao making speeches to the masses
At the Third Congress of the Communist Party in Shanghai in June 1923, the delegates reaffirmed their commitment to working with the KMT against the Beiyang government and imperialists. Supporting this position, Mao was elected to the Party Committee, taking up residence in Shanghai.[74] Attending the First KMT Congress, held in Guangzhou in early 1924, Mao was elected an alternate member of the KMT Central Executive Committee, and put forward four resolutions to decentralise power to urban and rural bureaus. His enthusiastic support for the KMT earned him the suspicion of some Communists.[75] In late 1924, Mao returned to Shaoshan to recuperate from an illness. He found that the peasantry were increasingly restless due to the upheaval of the past decade and some had seized land from wealthy landowners to found communes. This convinced him of the revolutionary potential of the peasantry, an idea advocated by the KMT but not the Communists.[76] He returned to Guangzhou to run the 6th term of the KMT's Peasant Movement Training Institute from May to September 1926.[77][78] He also served as the director of its propaganda department and edited its Political Weekly (Zhengzhi Zhoubao) newsletter.[79][80] Through the Peasant Movement Training Institute, Mao took an active role in organizing the revolutionary Hunanese peasants and preparing them for militant activity, taking them through military training exercises and getting them to study various left-wing texts.[81] In the winter of 1925, Mao fled to Guangzhou after his revolutionary activities attracted the attention of Zhao's regional authorities.[82]

The Communists controlled the left wing of the KMT, struggling for power with the party's right wing. When party leader Sun Yat-sen died in May 1925, he was succeeded by a rightist, Chiang Kai-shek, who initiated moves to marginalise the position of the Communists.[83] Mao nevertheless supported Chiang's decision to overthrow the Beiyang government and their foreign imperialist allies using the National Revolutionary Army, who embarked on the Northern Expedition attack in 1926 on warlords, particularly Zhang.[84] In the wake of this expedition, peasants rose up, appropriating the land of the wealthy landowners, whom were in many cases killed. Such uprisings angered senior KMT figures, who were themselves landowners, emphasizing the growing class and ideological divide within the revolutionary movement.[85]

"Revolution is not a dinner party, nor an essay, nor a painting, nor a piece of embroidery; it cannot be so refined, so leisurely and gentle, so temperate, kind, courteous, restrained and magnanimous. A revolution is an insurrection, an act of violence by which one class overthrows another."

 Mao, February 1927.[86]
In March 1927, Mao appeared at the Third Plenum of the KMT Central Executive Committee in Wuhan, which sought to strip General Chiang of his power by appointing Wang Jingwei leader. There, Mao played an active role in the discussions regarding the peasant issue, defending a set of "Regulations for the Repression of Local Bullies and Bad Gentry", which advocated the death penalty or life imprisonment for anyone found guilty of counter-revolutionary activity, arguing that in a revolutionary situation, "peaceful methods cannot suffice".[87][88] In April 1927, Mao was appointed to the KMT's five-member Central Land Committee, urging peasants to refuse to pay rent. Mao led another group to put together a "Draft Resolution on the Land Question", which called for the confiscation of land belonging to "local bullies and bad gentry, corrupt officials, militarists and all counter-revolutionary elements in the villages". Proceeding to carry out a "Land Survey", he stated that anyone owning over 30 mou (four and a half acres), constituting 13% of the population, were uniformly counter-revolutionary. He accepted that there was great variation in revolutionary enthusiasm across the country, and that a flexible policy of land redistribution was necessary.[89] Presenting his conclusions at the Enlarged Land Committee meeting, many expressed reservations, some believing that it went too far, and others not far enough. Ultimately, his suggestions were only partially implemented.[90]

Civil War
Main articles: Chinese Civil War and Chinese Communist Revolution
The Nanchang and Autumn Harvest Uprisings: 1927

Flag of the Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army
Fresh from the success of the Northern Expedition against the warlords, Chiang turned on the Communists, who by now numbered in the tens of thousands across China. Chiang ignored the orders of the Wuhan-based KMT government and marched on Shanghai, a city controlled by Communist militias. Although the Communists welcomed Chiang's arrival, he turned on them, massacring 5000 with the aid of the Green Gang.[88][91] Chiang's army then marched on Wuhan, but was prevented from taking the city by Communist General Ye Ting.[92] Chiang's allies also attacked Communists; in Beijing, 19 leading Communists were killed by Zhang Zuolin, while in Changsha, He Jian's forces machine gunned hundreds of peasant militiamen.[93][94] That May, tens of thousands of Communists and their sympathisers were killed by nationalists, and the CPC lost approximately 15,000 of its 25,000 members.[94]

"'Eagles cleave the air,
Fish glide in the limpid deep;
Under freezing skies a million
creatures contend in freedom.
Brooding over this immensity,
I ask, on this boundless land
Who rules over man's destiny?"

 Excerpt from Mao's
poem "Changsha", September 1927.[95]
The CPC continued supporting the Wuhan KMT government, a position Mao initially supported,[94] but by the time of the CPC's Fifth Congress he had changed his mind, deciding to stake all hope on the peasant militia.[96] The question was rendered moot when the Wuhan government expelled all Communists from the KMT on July 15.[96] The CPC founded the Workers' and Peasants' Red Army of China, better known as the "Red Army", to battle Chiang. A battalion led by General Zhu De was ordered to take the city of Nanchang on August 1, 1927 in what became known as the Nanchang Uprising. They were initially successful, but were forced into retreat after five days, marching south to Shantou, and from there they were driven into the wilderness of Fujian.[96] Mao was appointed commander-in-chief of the Red Army and led four regiments against Changsha in the Autumn Harvest Uprising, in the hope of sparking peasant uprisings across Hunan. On the eve of the attack, Mao composed a poemthe earliest of his to survivetitled "Changsha". His plan was to attack the KMT-held city from three directions on September 9, but the Fourth Regiment deserted to the KMT cause, attacking the Third Regiment. Mao's army made it to Changsha, but could not take it; by September 15, he accepted defeat and with 1000 survivors marched east to the Jinggang Mountains of Jiangxi.[95][97]

In their biography of Mao, Mao: The Unknown Story, Jung Chang and Jon Halliday dispute this version of events.[98] Chang and Halliday claim that the uprising was in fact sabotaged by Mao to allow him to snare a force of Nationalist mutineers defecting from Nanchang to the CPC and prevent them from defecting to any other CPC leader. By doing so, he hoped to strengthen his own personal power within the CPC. They claim that Mao's three-day delay in meeting the other leaders of the Hunan uprising, scheduled for August 15 but delayed by Mao until August 18, was to allow him to check that the mutineers would still be passing close by, and that if Mao had not had the opportunity of adding this force to his own he would not have gone to south Hunan.[99]

Chang and Halliday also claim that Mao lobbied to narrow the uprising and talked the other leaders (including Russian diplomats at the Soviet consulate in Changsha who, Chang and Halliday claim, had been controlling much of the CPC activity) into striking only at Changsha. This, they say, Mao desired in order to allow him to also gain control of a force of 1,700 peasant rebels and defectors from the Nationalist army who were near Changsha. Chang and Halliday point out that once Mao had gained control of these men, he then moved to a position 100 km east of Changsha at Wenjiashi, September 11. On September 14, before the troops had reached Changsha or met heavy resistance, Mao ordered them to abandon the assault on Changsha and converge on his position. Chang and Halliday report a view sent to Moscow by the secretary of the Soviet Consulate in Changsha that the retreat was "the most despicable treachery and cowardice."[99]

Chang and Halliday allege that Mao later fabricated his version of the events to hide the fact that far from leading a peasant uprising, he had hijacked it for his own personal ends, had sabotaged the organisation, and departed with the new troops before the attack on Changsha had begun.[99]

Base in Jinggangshan: 1927C1928
The CPC Central Committee, hiding in Shanghai, expelled Mao from their ranks and from the Hunan Provincial Committee, as punishment for his "military opportunism", for his focus on rural activity, and for being too lenient with "bad gentry". They nevertheless adopted three policies he had long championed: the immediate formation of Workers' councils, the confiscation of all land without exemption, and the rejection of the KMT. Mao's response was to ignore them.[100] He established base in Jinggangshan City, an area of the Jinggang Mountains, where he united five villages as a self-governing state, and supported the confiscation of land from rich landlords, who were "re-educated" and sometimes executed. He ensured that no massacres took place in the region, and pursued a more lenient approach than that advocated by the Central Committee.[101] He proclaimed that "Even the lame, the deaf and the blind could all come in useful for the revolutionary struggle", he boosted the army's numbers,[102] incorporating two groups of bandits into his army, building a force of around 1,800 troops.[103] He laid down rules for his soldiers: prompt obedience to orders, all confiscations were to be turned over to the government, and nothing was to be confiscated from poorer peasants. In doing so, he molded his men into a disciplined, efficient fighting force.[102]

"When the enemy advances, we retreat.
When the enemy rests, we harass him.
When the enemy avoids a battle, we attack.
When the enemy retreats, we advance."

Mao's advice in combating the Kuomintang, 1928.[104][105]
In spring 1928, the Central Committee ordered Mao's troops to southern Hunan, hoping to spark peasant uprisings. Mao was skeptical, but complied. They reached Hunan, where they were attacked by the KMT and fled after heavy losses. Meanwhile, KMT troops had invaded Jinggangshan, leaving them without a base.[106] Wandering the countryside, Mao's forces came across a CPC regiment led by General Zhu De and Lin Biao; they united, and attempted to retake Jinggangshan. They were initially successful, but the KMT counter-attacked, and pushed the CPC back; over the next few weeks, they fought an entrenched guerrilla war in the mountains.[104][107] The Central Committee again ordered Mao to march to south Hunan, but he refused, and remained at his base. Contrastingly, Zhu complied, and led his armies away. Mao's troops fended the KMT off for 25 days while he left the camp at night to find reinforcements. He reunited with the decimated Zhu's army, and together they returned to Jinggangshan and retook the base. There they were joined by a defecting KMT regiment and Peng Dehuai's Fifth Red Army. In the mountainous area they were unable to grow enough crops to feed everyone, leading to food shortages throughout the winter.[108][109]

Jiangxi Soviet Republic of China: 1929C1934

Mao with his third wife, He Zizhen, 1928
In January 1929, Mao and Zhu evacuated the base with 2,000 men and a further 800 provided by Peng, and took their armies south, to the area around Tonggu and Xinfeng in Jiangxi. [110] The evacuation led to a drop in morale, and many troops became disobedient and began thieving; this worried Li Lisan and the Central Committee, who saw Mao's army as lumpenproletariat, that were unable to share in proletariat class consciousness.[111][112] In keeping with orthodox Marxist thought, Li believed that only the urban proletariat could lead a successful revolution, and saw little need for Mao's peasant guerrillas; he ordered Mao to disband his army into units to be sent out to spread the revolutionary message. Mao replied that while he concurred with Li's theoretical position, he would not disband his army nor abandon his base.[112][113] Both Li and Mao saw the Chinese revolution as the key to world revolution, believing that a CPC victory would spark the overthrow of global imperialism and capitalism. In this, they disagreed with the official line of the Soviet government and Comintern. Officials in Moscow desired greater control over the CPC and removed Li from power by calling him to Russia for an inquest into his errors.[114][115][116] They replaced him with Soviet-educated Chinese Communists, known as the "28 Bolsheviks", two of whom, Bo Gu and Zhang Wentian, took control of the Central Committee. Mao disagreed with the new leadership, believing they grasped little of the Chinese situation, and he soon emerged as their key rival.[115][117]

In February 1930, Mao created the Southwest Jiangxi Provincial Soviet Government in the region under his control.[118] In November, he suffered emotional trauma after his wife and sister were captured and beheaded by KMT general He Jian.[109][115][119] Mao then married He Zizhen, an 18-year-old revolutionary who bore him five children over the following nine years.[116][120] Facing internal problems, members of the Jiangxi Soviet accused him of being too moderate, and hence anti-revolutionary. In December, they tried to overthrow Mao, resulting in the Futian incident, during which Mao's loyalists tortured many and executed between 2000 and 3000 dissenters.[121][122][123] The CPC Central Committee moved to Jiangxi which it saw as a secure area. In November it proclaimed Jiangxi to be the Soviet Republic of China, an independent Communist-governed state. Although he was proclaimed Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars, Mao's power was diminished, as his control of the Red Army was allocated to Zhou Enlai. Meanwhile, Mao recovered from tuberculosis.[124][125]


Mao in 1931
The KMT armies adopted a policy of encirclement and annihilation of the Red armies. Outnumbered, Mao responded with guerrilla tactics influenced by the works of ancient military strategists like Sun Tzu, but Zhou and the new leadership followed a policy of open confrontation and conventional warfare. In doing so, the Red Army successfully defeated the first and second encirclements.[126][127] Angered at his armies' failure, Chiang Kai-shek personally arrived to lead the operation. He too faced setbacks and retreated to deal with the further Japanese incursions into China.[124][128] As a result of the KMT's change of focus to the defence of China against Japanese expansionism, the Red Army was able to expand its area of control, eventually encompassing a population of 3 million.[127] Mao proceeded with his land reform program. In November 1931 he announced the start of a "land verification project" which was expanded in June 1933. He also orchestrated education programs and implemented measures to increase female political participation.[129] Chiang viewed the Communists as a greater threat than the Japanese and returned to Jiangxi, where he initiated the fifth encirclement campaign, which involved the construction of a concrete and barbed wire "wall of fire" around the state, which was accompanied by aerial bombardment, to which Zhou's tactics proved ineffective. Trapped inside, morale among the Red Army dropped as food and medicine became scarce. The leadership decided to evacuate.[130]

The Long March: 1934C1935
On October 14, 1934, the Red Army broke through the KMT line on the Jiangxi Soviet's south-west corner at Xinfeng with 85,000 soldiers and 15,000 party cadres and embarked on the "Long March". In order to make the escape, many of the wounded and the ill, as well as women and children, were left behind, defended by a group of guerrilla fighters whom the KMT massacred.[131][132] The 100,000 who escaped headed to southern Hunan, first crossing the Xiang River after heavy fighting,[132][133] and then the Wu River, in Guizhou where they took Zunyi in January 1935. Temporarily resting in the city, they held a conference; here, Mao was elected to a position of leadership, becoming Chairman of the Politburo, and de facto leader of both Party and Red Army, in part because his candidacy was supported by Soviet Premier Joseph Stalin. Insisting that they operate as a guerrilla force, he laid out a destination: the Shenshi Soviet in Shaanxi, Northern China, from where the Communists could focus on fighting the Japanese. Mao believed that in focusing on the anti-imperialist struggle, the Communists would earn the trust of the Chinese people, who in turn would renounce the KMT.[134]

From Zunyi, Mao led his troops to Loushan Pass, where they faced armed opposition but successfully crossed the river. Chiang flew into the area to lead his armies against Mao, but the Communists outmanoeuvred him and crossed the Jinsha River.[135] Faced with the more difficult task of crossing the Tatu River, they managed it by fighting a battle over the Luding Bridge in May, taking Luding.[136] Marching through the mountain ranges around Ma'anshan,[137] in Moukung, Western Szechuan, they encountered the 50,000-strong CPC Fourth Front Army of Zhang Guotao, and together proceeded to Maoerhkai and then Gansu. Zhang and Mao disagreed over what to do; the latter wished to proceed to Shaanxi, while Zhang wanted to retreat east to Tibet or Sikkim, far from the KMT threat. It was agreed that they would go their separate ways, with Zhu De joining Zhang.[138] Mao's forces proceeded north, through hundreds of miles of Grasslands, an area of quagmire where they were attacked by Manchu tribesman and where many soldiers succumbed to famine and disease.[139][140] Finally reaching Shaanxi, they fought off both the KMT and an Islamic cavalry militia before crossing the Min Mountains and Mount Liupan and reaching the Shenshi Soviet; only 7-8000 had survived.[140][141] The Long March cemented Mao's status as the dominant figure in the party. In November 1935, he was named chairman of the Military Commission. From this point onward, Mao was the Communist Party's undisputed leader, even though he would not become party chairman until 1943.[142]

Many if not most of the events as later described by Mao and which the CPC claims are true are seen as false by Jung Chang. During the decade spent researching the book, Mao: The Unknown Story,[143] for instance, Chang found evidence that there was no battle at Luding and that the CPC crossed the bridge unopposed. Chang interviewed an eye witness to the crossing of the Dadu (Tatu) River at Luding, Mrs Zhu De, then 93 years old, who recalled no deaths, except for two people who fell from the bridge at Luding while repairing it. Chang also points out the contradictions in the version of events as told by the CPC, which said the bridge was taken by a suicide attack by 22 men, but that these men were also present at a ceremony following the crossing of the bridge.[144]

Chang and Halliday also dispute the Communist Party of China's official version by claiming that far from the Long March being a masterful piece of strategy by the CPC, it was in fact devised by Chiang Kai-shek, leader of the KMT. Chiang's aim was to give the CPC an easy route to follow through warlord controlled areas. Hemmed in by Nationalist troops on three sides, the CPC was forced to follow the route dictated by the KMT. The aim of this was to allow KMT forces to follow the reds into warlord controlled areas such as Sichuan and win over warlords scared of the sudden arrival of the Communist force. The only glitch in this plan came when Mao refused to follow the easy route into Sichuan where he was to meet up with a red army much larger than his own and led by a more senior CPC member, Chang Kuo Tao. Mao recognised the threat Chang posed to his rising position in the CPC and doubled back to give himself time to further cement his political power, causing the needless deaths of thousands of his own troops.[144]

Chang and Halliday also claim that Mao and other top CPC leaders did not walk the Long March, but were carried on litters C Mao himself told his staff that being carried on the Long March gave him much time to read C with the litter bearers' knees being worn to the bone when forced to carry Mao up mountains.[144]

Alliance with the Kuomintang: 1935C1940
Main article: Second Sino-Japanese War

In an effort to defeat the Japanese, Mao (left) agreed to collaborate with Chiang (right).
Mao's troops arrived at the Yan'an Soviet during October 1935 and settled in Pao An, until spring 1936. While there, they developed links with local communities, redistributed and farmed the land, offered medical treatment, and began literacy programs.[140][145][146] Mao now commanded 15,000 soldiers, boosted by the arrival of He Long's men from Hunan and the armies of Zhu Den and Zhang Guotao returned from Tibet.[145] In February 1936 they established the North West Anti-Japanese Red Army University in Yan'an, through which they trained increasing numbers of new recruits.[147] In January 1937 they began the "anti-Japanese expedition", that sent groups of guerrilla fighters into Japanese-controlled territory to undertake sporadic attacks.[148][149] In May 1937, a Communist Conference was held in Yan'an to discuss the situation.[150] Western reporters also arrived in the "Border Region" (as the Soviet had been renamed); most notable were Edgar Snow, who used his experiences as a basis for Red Star Over China, and Agnes Smedley, whose accounts brought international attention to Mao's cause.[151]

On the Long March, Mao's wife He Zizen had been injured by a shrapnel wound to the head. She traveled to Moscow for medical treatment; Mao proceeded to divorce her and marry an actress, Jiang Qing.[120][152] Mao moved into a cave-house and spent much of his time reading, tending his garden and theorizing.[153] He came to believe that the Red Army alone was unable to defeat the Japanese, and that a Communist-led "government of national defence" should be formed with the KMT and other "bourgeois nationalist" elements to achieve this goal.[154] Although despising Chiang Kai-shek as a "traitor to the nation",[155] on May 5 he telegrammed the Military Council of the Nanking National Government proposing a military alliance, a course of action advocated by Stalin.[156] Although Chiang intended to ignore Mao's message and continue the civil war, he was arrested by one of his own generals, Zhang Xueliang, in Xi'an, leading to the Xi'an Incident; Zhang forced Chiang to discuss the issue with the Communists, resulting in the formation of a United Front with concessions on both sides on December 25, 1937.[157]


Mao in 1938, writing On Protracted War.
The Japanese had taken both Shanghai and Nanking (Nanjing)resulting in the Nanking Massacre, an atrocity Mao never spoke of all his lifeand was pushing the Kuomintang government inland to Chungking.[158] The Japanese's brutality led to increasing numbers of Chinese joining the fight, and the Red Army grew from 50,000 to 500,000.[159][160] In August 1938, the Red Army formed the New Fourth Army and the Eighth Route Army, which were nominally under the command of Chiang's National Revolutionary Army.[161] In August 1940, the Red Army initiated the Hundred Regiments Campaign, in which 400,000 troops attacked the Japanese simultaneously in five provinces. It was a military success, that resulted in the death of 20,000 Japanese, the disruption of railways and the loss of a coal mine.[160][162] From his base in Yan'an, Mao authored several texts for his troops, including Philosophy of Revolution, which offered an introduction to the Marxist theory of knowledge, Protracted Warfare, which dealt with guerilla and mobile military tactics, and New Democracy, which laid forward ideas for China's future.[163]

Resuming civil war: 1940C1949
In 1944, the Americans sent a special diplomatic envoy, called the Dixie Mission, to the Communist Party of China. According to Edwin Moise, in Modern China: A History 2nd Edition:

Most of the Americans were favourably impressed. The CPC seemed less corrupt, more unified, and more vigorous in its resistance to Japan than the KMT. United States fliers shot down over North China ... confirmed to their superiors that the CPC was both strong and popular over a broad area. In the end, the contacts with the USA developed with the CPC led to very little.

After the end of World War II, the U.S. continued their military assistance to Chiang Kai-shek and his KMT government forces against the People's Liberation Army (PLA) led by Mao Zedong during the civil war. Likewise, the Soviet Union gave quasi-covert support to Mao by their occupation of north east China, which allowed the PLA to move in en masse and take large supplies of arms left by the Japanese's Kwantung Army.[citation needed]

To enhance the Red Army's military operations, Mao as the Chairman of the Communist Party of China, named his close associate General Zhu De to be its Commander-in-Chief.

In 1948, under direct orders from Mao, the People's Liberation Army starved out the Kuomintang forces occupying the city of Changchun. At least 160,000 civilians are believed to have perished during the siege, which lasted from June until October. PLA lieutenant colonel Zhang Zhenglu, who documented the siege in his book White Snow, Red Blood, compared it to Hiroshima: "The casualties were about the same. Hiroshima took nine seconds; Changchun took five months."[164] On January 21, 1949, Kuomintang forces suffered great losses in decisive battles against Mao's forces.[165] In the early morning of December 10, 1949, PLA troops laid siege to Chongqing and Chengdu on mainland China, and Chiang Kai-shek fled from the mainland to Formosa (Taiwan).[165][166]

Leadership of China

Mao Zedong declares the founding of the modern People's Republic of China, October 1, 1949.
The People's Republic of China was established on October 1, 1949. It was the culmination of over two decades of civil and international wars. Mao's famous phrase "The Chinese people have stood up" (Chinese: ) associated with the establishment of the People's Republic of China was not used in the speech he delivered from the Gate of Heavenly Peace on October 1.[167]

Mao took up residence in Zhongnanhai, a compound next to the Forbidden City in Beijing, and there he ordered the construction of an indoor swimming pool and other buildings. Mao's physician Li Zhisui described him as conducting business either in bed or by the side of the pool, preferring not to wear formal clothes unless absolutely necessary.[168] Li's book, The Private Life of Chairman Mao, is regarded as controversial, especially by those sympathetic to Mao.[169]

In October 1950, Mao made the decision to send the People's Volunteer Army (PVA), a special unit of the People's Liberation Army, into the war in Korea and fight as well as to reinforce the armed forces of North Korea, the Korean People's Army, which had been in full retreat. Historical records showed that Mao directed the PVA campaigns to the minutest details. As the Chairman of the CPC's Central Military Commission (CMC), he was also the Supreme Commander in Chief of the PLA and the People's Republic and Chairman of the ruling CPC. The PVA was under the overall command of then newly installed Premier Zhou Enlai, with General Peng Dehuai as field commander and political commissar.[170]


Mao with his fourth wife, Jiang Qing, called "Madame Mao", 1946
During the land reform, a significant numbers of landlords and well-to-do peasants were beaten to death at mass meetings organised by the Communist Party as land was taken from them and given to poorer peasants.[171] The Campaign to Suppress Counter-revolutionaries,[172] involved public executions that targeted mainly former Kuomintang officials, businessmen accused of "disturbing" the market, former employees of Western companies and intellectuals whose loyalty was suspect.[173] In 1976, the U.S. State department estimated as many as a million were killed in the land reform, and 800,000 killed in the counter-revolutionary campaign.[174]

Mao himself claimed that a total of 700,000 people were killed in attacks on "counter-revolutionaries" during the years 1950C52.[175] However, because there was a policy to select "at least one landlord, and usually several, in virtually every village for public execution",[176] the number of deaths range between 2 million[176][177] and 5 million.[178][179] In addition, at least 1.5 million people,[180] perhaps as many as 4 to 6 million,[181] were sent to "reform through labour" camps where many perished.[181] Mao played a personal role in organizing the mass repressions and established a system of execution quotas,[182] which were often exceeded.[172] He defended these killings as necessary for the securing of power.[183]

Starting in 1951, Mao initiated two successive movements in an effort to rid urban areas of corruption by targeting wealthy capitalists and political opponents, known as the three-anti/five-anti campaigns. Whereas the three-anti campaign was a focused purge of government, industrial and party officials, the five-anti campaign set its sights slightly broader, targeting capitalist elements in general.[184] Workers denounced their bosses, spouses turned on their spouses, and children informed on their parents; the victims were often humiliated at struggle sessions, a method designed to intimidate and terrify people to the maximum. Mao insisted that minor offenders be criticised and reformed or sent to labour camps, "while the worst among them should be shot". These campaigns took several hundred thousand additional lives, the vast majority via suicide.[185]

In Shanghai, suicide by jumping from tall buildings became so commonplace that residents avoided walking on the pavement near skyscrapers for fear that suicides might land on them.[186] Some biographers have pointed out that driving those perceived as enemies to suicide was a common tactic during the Mao-era. For example, in his biography of Mao, Philip Short notes that in the Yan'an Rectification Movement, Mao gave explicit instructions that "no cadre is to be killed", but in practice allowed security chief Kang Sheng to drive opponents to suicide and that "this pattern was repeated throughout his leadership of the People's Republic."[7]


Mao at Joseph Stalin's 70th birthday celebration in Moscow, December 1949
Following the consolidation of power, Mao launched the First Five-Year Plan (1953C58). The plan aimed to end Chinese dependence upon agriculture in order to become a world power. With the Soviet Union's assistance, new industrial plants were built and agricultural production eventually fell[clarification needed] to a point where industry was beginning to produce enough capital that China no longer needed the USSR's support.[citation needed] The success of the First-Five Year Plan was to encourage Mao to instigate the Second Five-Year Plan in 1958. Mao also launched a phase of rapid collectivization. The CPC introduced price controls as well as a Chinese character simplification aimed at increasing literacy. Large-scale industrialization projects were also undertaken.

Programs pursued during this time include the Hundred Flowers Campaign, in which Mao indicated his supposed willingness to consider different opinions about how China should be governed. Given the freedom to express themselves, liberal and intellectual Chinese began opposing the Communist Party and questioning its leadership. This was initially tolerated and encouraged. After a few months, Mao's government reversed its policy and persecuted those, totaling perhaps 500,000,[citation needed] who criticised, as well as those who were merely alleged to have criticised, the party in what is called the Anti-Rightist Movement. Authors such as Jung Chang have alleged that the Hundred Flowers Campaign was merely a ruse to root out "dangerous" thinking.[187]

Li Zhisui, Mao's physician, suggested that Mao had initially seen the policy as a way of weakening opposition to him within the party and that he was surprised by the extent of criticism and the fact that it came to be directed at his own leadership.[188] It was only then that he used it as a method of identifying and subsequently persecuting those critical of his government. The Hundred Flowers movement led to the condemnation, silencing, and death of many citizens, also linked to Mao's Anti-Rightist Movement, resulting in deaths possibly in the millions.[citation needed]

Great Leap Forward

Mao with Nikita Khrushchev, Ho Chi Minh and Soong Ching-ling during a state dinner in Beijing, 1959
In January 1958, Mao launched the second Five-Year Plan, known as the Great Leap Forward, a plan intended as an alternative model for economic growth to the Soviet model focusing on heavy industry that was advocated by others in the party. Under this economic program, the relatively small agricultural collectives which had been formed to date were rapidly merged into far larger people's communes, and many of the peasants were ordered to work on massive infrastructure projects and on the production of iron and steel. Some private food production was banned; livestock and farm implements were brought under collective ownership.

Under the Great Leap Forward, Mao and other party leaders ordered the implementation of a variety of unproven and unscientific new agricultural techniques by the new communes. The combined effect of the diversion of labour to steel production and infrastructure projects, and cyclical natural disasters led to an approximately 15% drop in grain production in 1959 followed by a further 10% decline in 1960 and no recovery in 1961.[189]

In an effort to win favour with their superiors and avoid being purged, each layer in the party hierarchy exaggerated the amount of grain produced under them. Based upon the fabricated success, party cadres were ordered to requisition a disproportionately high amount of that fictitious harvest for state use, primarily for use in the cities and urban areas but also for export. The result, compounded in some areas by drought and in others by floods, was that rural peasants were left with little food for themselves and many millions starved to death in the largest famine known as the Great Chinese Famine. This famine was a direct cause of the death of some 30 million Chinese peasants between 1959 and 1962.[190] Further, many children who became emaciated and malnourished during years of hardship and struggle for survival died shortly after the Great Leap Forward came to an end in 1962.[189]

The extent of Mao's knowledge of the severity of the situation has been disputed. Mao's physician believed that he may have been unaware of the extent of the famine, partly due to a reluctance to criticise his policies, and the willingness of his staff to exaggerate or outright fake reports regarding food production.[191] Upon learning of the extent of the starvation, Mao vowed to stop eating meat, an action followed by his staff.[192]


In the beginning, commune members were able to eat for free at the commune canteens. This changed when food production slowed to a halt.
Hong Kong-based historian Frank Dik?tter,[193] challenged the notion that Mao did not know about the famine throughout the country until it was too late:

The idea that the state mistakenly took too much grain from the countryside because it assumed that the harvest was much larger than it was is largely a mythat most partially true for the autumn of 1958 only. In most cases the party knew very well that it was starving its own people to death. At a secret meeting in the Jinjiang Hotel in Shanghai dated March 25, 1959, Mao specifically ordered the party to procure up to one third of all the grain, much more than had ever been the case. At the meeting he announced that "To distribute resources evenly will only ruin the Great Leap Forward. When there is not enough to eat, people starve to death. It is better to let half of the people die so that the other half can eat their fill."[194][195]

Professor Emeritus Thomas P. Bernstein of Columbia University offered his view on Mao's statement on starvation in the March 25, 1959 meeting:

Some scholars believe that this shows Maos readiness to accept mass death on an immense scale. My own view is that this is an instance of Maos use of hyperbole, another being his casual acceptance of death of half the population during a nuclear war. In other contexts, Mao did not in fact accept mass death. Zhous Chronology shows that in October 1958, Mao expressed real concern that 40,000 people in Yunnan had starved to death (p. 173). Shortly after the March 25 meeting, he worried about 25.2 million people who were at risk of starvation.[196] But from late summer on, Mao essentially forgot about this issue, until, as noted, the "Xinyang Incident" came to light in October 1960.[197]

In the article "Mao Zedong and the Famine of 1959C1960: A Study in Wilfulness", published in 2006 in The China Quarterly, Professor Thomas P. Bernstein also discussed Mao's change of attitudes during different phases of the Great Leap Forward:

In late autumn 1958, Mao Zedong strongly condemned widespread practices of the Great Leap Forward (GLF) such as subjecting peasants to exhausting labour without adequate food and rest, which had resulted in epidemics, starvation and deaths. At that time Mao explicitly recognized that anti-rightist pressures on officialdom were a major cause of "production at the expense of livelihood." While he was not willing to acknowledge that only abandonment of the GLF could solve these problems, he did strongly demand that they be addressed. After the July 1959 clash at Lushan with Peng Dehuai, Mao revived the GLF in the context of a new, extremely harsh anti-rightist campaign, which he relentlessly promoted into the spring of 1960 together with the radical policies that he previously condemned. Not until spring 1960 did Mao again express concern about abnormal deaths and other abuses, but he failed to apply the pressure needed to stop them. Given what he had already learned about the costs to the peasants of GLF extremism, the Chairman should have known that the revival of GLF radicalism would exact a similar or even bigger price. Instead, he wilfully ignored the lessons of the first radical phase for the sake of achieving extreme ideological and developmental goals.[196]

In Hungry Ghosts: Mao's Secret Famine, Jasper Becker notes that Mao was dismissive of reports he received of food shortages in the countryside and refused to change course, believing that peasants were lying and that rightists and kulaks were hoarding grain. He refused to open state granaries,[198] and instead launched a series of "anti-grain concealment" drives that resulted in numerous purges and suicides.[199] Other violent campaigns followed in which party leaders went from village to village in search of hidden food reserves, and not only grain, as Mao issued quotas for pigs, chickens, ducks and eggs. Many peasants accused of hiding food were tortured and beaten to death.[200]

Whatever the cause of the disaster, Mao lost esteem among many of the top party cadres, was eventually forced to abandon the policy in 1962, and lost political power to moderate leaders, perhaps most notably Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping. Mao, however, supported by national propaganda, claimed that he was only partly to blame for the famine. As a result, he was able to remain Chairman of the Communist Party, with the Presidency transferred to Liu Shaoqi.

The Great Leap Forward was a tragedy for the vast majority of the Chinese. Although the steel quotas were officially reached, almost all of the supposed steel made in the countryside was iron, as it had been made from assorted scrap metal in home-made furnaces with no reliable source of fuel such as coal. This meant that proper smelting conditions could not be achieved. According to Zhang Rongmei, a geometry teacher in rural Shanghai during the Great Leap Forward:

"We took all the furniture, pots, and pans we had in our house, and all our neighbours did likewise. We put everything in a big fire and melted down all the metal."

The worst of the famine was steered towards enemies of the state.[201] As Jasper Becker explains:

"The most vulnerable section of China's population, around five per cent, were those whom Mao called 'enemies of the people'. Anyone who had in previous campaigns of repression been labeled a 'black element' was given the lowest priority in the allocation of food. Landlords, rich peasants, former members of the nationalist regime, religious leaders, rightists, counter-revolutionaries and the families of such individuals died in the greatest numbers."[202]

At a large Communist Party conference in Beijing in January 1962, called the "Conference of the Seven Thousand", State Chairman Liu Shaoqi denounced the Great Leap Forward as responsible for widespread famine.[203] The overwhelming majority of delegates expressed agreement, but Defense Minister Lin Biao staunchly defended Mao.[203] A brief period of liberalization followed while Mao and Lin plotted a comeback.[203] Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping rescued the economy by disbanding the people's communes, introducing elements of private control of peasant smallholdings and importing grain from Canada and Australia to mitigate the worst effects of famine.[citation needed]


Mao with Henry Kissinger and Zhou Enlai; Beijing, 1972.
Consequences
At the Lushan Conference in July/August 1959, several ministers expressed concern that the Great Leap Forward had not proved as successful as planned. The most direct of these was Minister of Defence and Korean War veteran General Peng Dehuai. Following Peng's criticism of the Great Leap Forward, Mao orchestrated a purge of Peng and his supporters, stifling criticism of the Great Leap policies. Senior officials who reported the truth of the famine to Mao were branded as "right opportunists."[204] A campaign against right-wing opportunism was launched and resulted in party members and ordinary peasants being sent to prison labor camps where many would subsequently die in the famine. Years later the CPC would conclude that as many as six million people were wrongly punished in the campaign.[205]

The number of deaths by starvation during the Great Leap Forward is deeply controversial. Until the mid-1980s, when official census figures were finally published by the Chinese Government, little was known about the scale of the disaster in the Chinese countryside, as the handful of Western observers allowed access during this time had been restricted to model villages where they were deceived into believing that the Great Leap Forward had been a great success. There was also an assumption that the flow of individual reports of starvation that had been reaching the West, primarily through Hong Kong and Taiwan, must have been localised or exaggerated as China was continuing to claim record harvests and was a net exporter of grain through the period. Because Mao wanted to pay back early to the Soviets debts totalling 1.973 billion yuan from 1960 to 1962,[206] exports increased by 50%, and fellow Communist regimes in North Korea, North Vietnam and Albania were provided grain free of charge.[198]

Censuses were carried out in China in 1953, 1964 and 1982. The first attempt to analyse this data to estimate the number of famine deaths was carried out by American demographer Dr. Judith Banister and published in 1984. Given the lengthy gaps between the censuses and doubts over the reliability of the data, an accurate figure is difficult to ascertain. Nevertheless, Banister concluded that the official data implied that around 15 million excess deaths incurred in China during 1958C61, and that based on her modelling of Chinese demographics during the period and taking account of assumed under-reporting during the famine years, the figure was around 30 million. The official statistic is 20 million deaths, as given by Hu Yaobang.[207] Yang Jisheng, a former Xinhua News Agency reporter who had privileged access and connections available to no other scholars, estimates a death toll of 36 million.[206] Frank Dik?tter estimates that there were at least 45 million premature deaths attributable to the Great Leap Forward from 1958 to 1962.[208] Various other sources have put the figure at between 20 and 46 million.[209]

Split from Soviet Union

US President Gerald Ford watches as Henry Kissinger shakes hands with Mao Zedong during their visit to China, December 2, 1975
Main article: Sino-Soviet split
On the international front, the period was dominated by the further isolation of China. The Sino-Soviet split resulted in Nikita Khrushchev's withdrawal of all Soviet technical experts and aid from the country. The split concerned the leadership of world Communism. The USSR had a network of Communist parties it supported; China now created its own rival network to battle it out for local control of the left in numerous countries.[210] Lorenz M. Lthi argues:

The Sino-Soviet split was one of the key events of the Cold War, equal in importance to the construction of the Berlin Wall, the Cuban Missile Crisis, the Second Vietnam War, and Sino-American rapprochement. The split helped to determine the framework of the Second Cold War in general, and influenced the course of the Second Vietnam War in particular.[211]
The split resulted from Nikita Khrushchev's more moderate Soviet leadership after the death of Stalin in March 1953. Only Albania openly sided with China, thereby forming an alliance between the two countries which would last until after Mao's death in 1976. Warned that the Soviets had nuclear weapons, Mao minimized the threat. Becker says that, "Mao believed that the bomb was a 'paper tiger', declaring to Khrushchev that it would not matter if China lost 300 million people in a nuclear war: the other half of the population would survive to ensure victory."[212]

Stalin had established himself as the successor of "correct" Marxist thought well before Mao controlled the Communist Party of China, and therefore Mao never challenged the suitability of any Stalinist doctrine (at least while Stalin was alive). Upon the death of Stalin, Mao believed (perhaps because of seniority) that the leadership of Marxist doctrine would fall to him. The resulting tension between Khrushchev (at the head of a politically and militarily superior government), and Mao (believing he had a superior understanding of Marxist ideology) eroded the previous patron-client relationship between the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and the CPC.[citation needed] In China, the formerly favoured Soviets were now denounced as "revisionists" and listed alongside "American imperialism" as movements to oppose.[citation needed]

Partly surrounded by hostile American military bases (in South Korea, Japan, and Taiwan), China was now confronted with a new Soviet threat from the north and west. Both the internal crisis and the external threat called for extraordinary statesmanship from Mao, but as China entered the new decade the statesmen of the People's Republic were in hostile confrontation with each other.[citation needed]

Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution
During the early 1960s, Mao became concerned with the nature of post-1959 China. He saw that the revolution and Great Leap Forward had replaced the old elite with a new one. He was concerned that those in power were becoming estranged from the people they were to serve. Mao believed that a revolution of culture would unseat and unsettle the "ruling class" and keep China in a state of "perpetual revolution" that, theoretically, would serve the interests of the majority, rather than a tiny and privileged elite.[213] State Chairman Liu Shaoqi and General Secretary Deng Xiaoping favoured the idea that Mao be removed from actual power but maintain his ceremonial and symbolic role, with the party upholding all of his positive contributions to the revolution. They attempted to marginalise Mao by taking control of economic policy and asserting themselves politically as well. Many claim that Mao responded to Liu and Deng's movements by launching the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution in 1966. Some scholars, such as Mobo Gao, claim the case for this is overstated.[214] Others, such as Frank Dik?tter, hold that Mao launched the Cultural Revolution to wreak revenge on those who had dared to challenge him over the Great Leap Forward.[215]

Believing that certain liberal bourgeois elements of society continued to threaten the socialist framework, groups of young people known as the Red Guards struggled against authorities at all levels of society and even set up their own tribunals. Chaos reigned in much of the nation, and millions were persecuted, including a famous philosopher, Chen Yuen. During the Cultural Revolution, nearly all of the schools and universities in China were closed and the young intellectuals living in cities were ordered to the countryside to be "re-educated" by the peasants, where they performed hard manual labour and other work.

The Cultural Revolution led to the destruction of much of China's traditional cultural heritage and the imprisonment of a huge number of Chinese citizens, as well as the creation of general economic and social chaos in the country. Millions of lives were ruined during this period, as the Cultural Revolution pierced into every part of Chinese life, depicted by such Chinese films as To Live, The Blue Kite and Farewell My Concubine. It is estimated that hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions, perished in the violence of the Cultural Revolution.[209]

When Mao was informed of such losses, particularly that people had been driven to suicide, he is alleged to have commented: "People who try to commit suicide  don't attempt to save them! . . . China is such a populous nation, it is not as if we cannot do without a few people."[216] The authorities allowed the Red Guards to abuse and kill opponents of the regime. Said Xie Fuzhi, national police chief: "Don't say it is wrong of them to beat up bad persons: if in anger they beat someone to death, then so be it."[217] As a result, in August and September 1966, there were a reported 1,772 people murdered by the Red Guards in Beijing alone.[218]

It was during this period that Mao chose Lin Biao, who seemed to echo all of Mao's ideas, to become his successor. Lin was later officially named as Mao's successor. By 1971, however, a divide between the two men became apparent. Official history in China states that Lin was planning a military coup or an assassination attempt on Mao. Lin Biao died in a plane crash over the air space of Mongolia, presumably as he fled China, probably anticipating his arrest. The CPC declared that Lin was planning to depose Mao, and posthumously expelled Lin from the party. At this time, Mao lost trust in many of the top CPC figures. The highest-ranking Soviet Bloc intelligence defector, Lt. Gen. Ion Mihai Pacepa described his conversation with Nicolae Ceau?escu who told him about a plot to kill Mao Zedong with the help of Lin Biao organised by the KGB.[219]

Despite being considered a feminist figure by some and a supporter of women's rights, documents released by the US Department of State in 2008 show that Mao declared women to be a "nonsense" in 1973, in conversation with Kissinger, joking that "China is a very poor country. We don't have much. What we have in excess is women... Let them go to your place. They will create disasters. That way you can lessen our burdens."[220] When Mao offered 10 million women, Kissinger replied by saying that Mao was "improving his offer".[221] Mao and Kissinger then agreed that their comments on women be removed from public records, prompted by a Chinese official who feared that Mao's comments might incur public anger if released.[222]

"Mango fever"
On August 4, 1968, Mao was presented with some mangoes by the Pakistani foreign minister, Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, in an apparent diplomatic gesture.[223] Mao called the mangoes a "spiritual time bomb"[224] and shortly afterwards, Mao had his aide divide them up and send them to Mao Zedong Propaganda Teams across Beijing, starting with one started at Tsinghua University on August 5.[225] On August 7, an article was published in the People's Daily saying:

In the afternoon of the fifth, when the great happy news of Chairman Mao giving mangoes to the Capital Worker and Peasant Mao Zedong Thought Propaganda Team reached the Tsinghua University campus, people immediately gathered around the gift given by the Great Leader Chairman Mao. They cried out enthusiastically and sang with wild abandonment. Tears swelled up in their eyes, and they again and again sincerely wished that our most beloved Great Leader lived then thousand years without bounds ... They all made phone calls to their own work units to spread this happy news; and they also organised all kinds of celebratory activities all night long, and arrived at [the national leadership compound] Zhongnanhai despite the rain to report the good news, and to express their loyalty to the Great Leader Chairman Mao.[225]

Subsequent articles were also written by government officials propagandizing the reception of the mangoes,[226] and another poem in the People's Daily said: "Seeing that golden mango/Was as if seeing the great leader Chairman Mao ... Again and again touching that golden mango/the golden mango was so warm".[227] Few people at this time in China had ever seen a mango before, and a mango was seen as "a fruit of extreme rarity, like Mushrooms of Immortality".[227]

One of the mangoes was sent to the Beijing Textile Factory,[225] whose revolutionary committee organised a rally in the mangoes' honour.[226] Workers read out quotations from Mao and celebrated the gift. Altars were erected to prominently display the fruit; when the mango peel began to rot after a few days, the fruit was peeled and boiled in a pot of water. Workers then filed by and each was given a spoonful of mango water. The revolutionary committee also made a wax replica of the mango, and displayed this as a centrepiece in the factory. There followed several months of "mango fever", as the fruit became a focus of a "boundless loyalty" campaign for Chairman Mao. More replica mangoes were created and the replicas were sent on tour around Beijing and elsewhere in China. Many revolutionary committees visited the mangoes in Beijing from outlying provinces; approximately half a million people greeted the replicas when they arrived in Chengdu. Badges and wall posters featuring the mangoes and Mao were produced in the millions.[225] The fruit was shared among all institutions that had been a part of the propaganda team, and large processions were organised in support of the zhengui lipin ("precious gift"), as the mangoes were known as.[228] One dentist in a small village compared a mango to a sweet potato; he was put on trial for malicious slander and executed.[227]

It has been claimed that Mao used the mangoes to express support for the workers who would go to whatever lengths necessary to end the factional fighting among students, and a "prime example of Mao's strategy of symbolic support".[226] Even up until early 1969, participants of Mao Zedong Thought study classes in Beijing would return with mass-produced mango facsimiles and still gain media attention in the provinces.[228]

End of the Cultural Revolution
In 1969, Mao declared the Cultural Revolution to be over, although various historians in and outside of China mark the end of the Cultural Revolution C as a whole or in part C in 1976, following Mao's death and the arrest of the Gang of Four.[229] In the last years of his life, Mao was faced with declining health due to either Parkinson's disease[230] or, according to his physician, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,[231] as well as lung ailments due to smoking and heart trouble.[232] Some also attributed Mao's decline in health to the betrayal of Lin Biao. Mao remained passive as various factions within the Communist Party mobilised for the power struggle anticipated after his death.

This period is often looked at in official circles in China and in the West as a great stagnation or even of reversal for China. While many peoplean estimated 100 milliondid suffer,[233][vague] some scholars, such as Lee Feigon and Mobo Gao, claim there were many great advances, and in some sectors the Chinese economy continued to outperform the west.[234] They hold that the Cultural Revolution period laid the foundation for the spectacular growth that continues in China. During the Cultural Revolution, China exploded its first H-Bomb (1967), launched the Dong Fang Hong satellite (January 30, 1970), commissioned its first nuclear submarines and made various advances in science and technology. Healthcare was free, and living standards in the countryside continued to improve.[234]

Historian Daniel Leese notes that in the 1950s Mao's personality was hardening:

The impression of Mao's personality that emerges from the literature is disturbing. It reveals a certain temporal development from a down-to-earth leader, who was amicable when uncontested and occasionally reflected on the limits of his power, to an increasingly ruthless and self-indulgent dictator. Mao's preparedness to accept criticism decreased continuously.[235]
State visits

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Country	Date	Host
 Soviet Union	1949-12-16	Joseph Stalin
 Soviet Union	1957-11-02	Nikita Khrushchev
During his leadership, Mao traveled outside China on only two occasions, both state visits to the Soviet Union. When Mao stepped down as head of state in April 1959, further state visits and travels abroad were undertaken by president Liu Shaoqi rather than Mao personally.

Death and aftermath

This section's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (October 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Further information: Mausoleum of Mao Zedong
Smoking may have played an important role in his declining health, for Mao was a heavy smoker[236] during most of his adult life. It became a state secret that he suffered from multiple lung and heart ailments during his later years.[232] There are unconfirmed reports that he possibly had Parkinson's disease[230] in addition to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease.[231]

Mao's last public appearanceand the last known photograph of him alivewas on May 27, 1976, when he met the visiting Pakistani Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto during the latter's one-day visit to Beijing.[143] Mao suffered two major heart attacks in 1976, one in March and another in July, before a third struck on September 5, rendering him an invalid. Mao Zedong died nearly four days later just after midnight, at 00:10, on September 9, 1976, at age 82. The Communist Party of China delayed the announcement of his death until 16:00 later that day, when a radio message broadcast across the nation announced the news of Mao's passing while appealing for party unity.[237]

Mao's embalmed, CPC-flag-draped body lay in state at the Great Hall of the People for one week.[238] During this period, one million people (none of them foreign diplomats,[238] and the majority crying openly or otherwise displaying some kind of sadness)[239] and many foreign dignitaries (300,000C750,000) filed past Mao to pay their final respects. Chairman Mao's official portrait was hung on the wall, with a banner reading: "Carry on the cause left by Chairman Mao and carry on the cause of proletarian revolution to the end", until September 17.[238] On September 17, Chairman Mao's body was taken in a minibus from the Great Hall of the people to Maojiawan to the 305 Hospital that Liu Zhisui directed, and Mao's internal organs were preserved in formaldehyde.[238]

On September 18, a somber cacophony of guns, sirens, whistles and horns all across China was spontaneously blown in observance of a three-minute silence, which everybody except those performing essential tasks was ordered to observe.[240] After that, a band in Tiananmen Square, packed with and surrounded by millions of people, played "The Internationale". The final service on that day was concluded by Hua Guofeng's 20-minute-long eulogy atop Tiananmen Gate.[241] Mao's body was later permanently interred in a mausoleum in Beijing.[242]

Legacy

A large portrait of Mao by Zhang Zhenshi at Tiananmen
"Had Mao died in 1956, his achievements would have been immortal. Had he died in 1966, he would still have been a great man but flawed. But he died in 1976. Alas, what can one say?"

Chen Yun, a leading Communist Party official under Mao and Deng Xiaoping.[243]
Mao remains a controversial figure and there is little agreement over his legacy both in China and abroad. Supporters generally credit and praise him for having unified China and for ending the previous decades of civil war. He is also credited for having improved the status of women in China and for improving literacy and education. His policies caused the deaths of tens of millions of people in China during his 27-year reign, more than any other Twentieth Century leader; the number of people who died under his regime range from 40 million to as many as 70 million. However, supporters point out that in spite of this, life expectancy improved during his reign. His supporters claim that he rapidly industrialised China; however, others have claimed that his policies such as the "Great Leap Forward" and the "Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution", were impediments to industrialisation and modernisation. His supporters claim that his policies laid the groundwork for China's later rise to become an economic superpower, while others claim that his policies delayed economic development and that China's economy only underwent its rapid growth only after Mao's policies had been widely abandoned. Mao's revolutionary tactics continue to be used by insurgents, and his political ideology continues to be embraced by many Communist organizations around the world.

In mainland China, Mao is still revered by many members and supporters of the Communist Party and respected by the majority of the general population as the "Founding Father of modern China", credited for giving "the Chinese people dignity and self-respect."[244] Mobo Gao in his 2008 book The Battle for China's Past: Mao and the Cultural Revolution, credits Mao for raising the average life expectancy from 35 in 1949 to 63 by 1975, bringing "unity and stability to a country that had been plagued by civil wars and foreign invasions", and laying the foundation for China to "become the equal of the great global powers".[245] Gao also lauds Mao for carrying out massive land reform, promoting the status of women, improving popular literacy, and positively "transform(ing) Chinese society beyond recognition."[245]

However, Mao has many Chinese critics, both those who live inside and outside China. Opposition to Mao is subject to restriction and censorship in mainland China, but is especially strong elsewhere, where he is often reviled as a brutish ideologue. In the West, his name is generally associated with tyranny and his economic theories are widely discreditedthough to some political activists he remains a symbol against capitalism, imperialism and western influence. Even in China, key pillars of his economic theory have been largely dismantled by market reformers like Deng Xiaoping and Zhao Ziyang, who succeeded him as leaders of the Communist Party.


Statue of young Mao in Changsha, the capital of Hunan
Though the Chinese Communist Party, which Mao led to power, has rejected in practice the economic fundamentals of much of Mao's ideology, it retains for itself many of the powers established under Mao's reign: it controls the Chinese army, police, courts and media and does not permit multi-party elections at the national or local level, except in Hong Kong. Thus it is difficult to gauge the true extent of support for the Chinese Communist Party and Mao's legacy within mainland China. For its part, the Chinese government continues to officially regard Mao as a national hero. On December 25, 2008, China opened the Mao Zedong Square to visitors in his home town of central Hunan Province to mark the 115th anniversary of his birth.[246]

There continue to be disagreements on Mao's legacy. Former Party official Su Shachi, has opined that "he was a great historical criminal, but he was also a great force for good."[244] In a similar vein, journalist Liu Binyan has described Mao as "both monster and a genius."[244] Some historians argue that Mao Zedong was "one of the great tyrants of the twentieth century", and a dictator comparable to Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin,[247][248] with a death toll surpassing both.[7][9] In The Black Book of Communism, Jean Louis Margolin writes that "Mao Zedong was so powerful that he was often known as the Red Emperor ... the violence he erected into a whole system far exceeds any national tradition of violence that we might find in China."[249] Mao was frequently likened to China's First Emperor Qin Shi Huang, notorious for burying alive hundreds of scholars, and personally enjoyed the comparison.[250] During a speech to party cadre in 1958, Mao said he had far outdone Qin Shi Huang in his policy against intellectuals: "What did he amount to? He only buried alive 460 scholars, while we buried 46,000. In our suppression of the counter-revolutionaries, did we not kill some counter-revolutionary intellectuals? I once debated with the democratic people: You accuse us of acting like Chin-shih-huang, but you are wrong; we surpass him 100 times."[251][252] As a result of such tactics, critics have pointed out that:

The People's Republic of China under Mao exhibited the oppressive tendencies that were discernible in all the major absolutist regimes of the twentieth century. There are obvious parallels between Mao's China, Nazi Germany and Soviet Russia. Each of these regimes witnessed deliberately ordered mass 'cleansing' and extermination.[248]

Others, such as Philip Short, reject such comparisons in Mao: A Life, arguing that whereas the deaths caused by Nazi Germany and Soviet Russia were largely systematic and deliberate, the overwhelming majority of the deaths under Mao were unintended consequences of famine.[253] Short noted that landlord class were not exterminated as a people due to Mao's belief in redemption through thought reform.[253] He instead compared Mao with 19th-century Chinese reformers who challenged China's traditional beliefs in the era of China's clashes with Western colonial powers. Short argues, "Mao's tragedy and his grandeur were that he remained to the end in thrall to his own revolutionary dreams ... He freed China from the straitjacket of its Confucian past, but the bright Red future he promised turned out to be a sterile purgatory.[253]

Mao's English interpreter Sidney Rittenberg wrote in his memoir The Man Who Stayed Behind that whilst Mao "was a great leader in history", he was also "a great criminal because, not that he wanted to, not that he intended to, but in fact, his wild fantasies led to the deaths of tens of millions of people."[254] Li Rui, Mao's personal secretary, goes further and claims he was dismissive of the suffering and death caused by his policies: "Mao's way of thinking and governing was terrifying. He put no value on human life. The deaths of others meant nothing to him."[255]


Sculptures in front of the Mausoleum of Mao Zedong, Beijing
In their 832-page biography, Mao: The Unknown Story, Jung Chang and Jon Halliday take a very critical view of Mao's life and influence. For example, they note that Mao was well aware that his policies would be responsible for the deaths of millions; While discussing labour-intensive projects such as waterworks and making steel, Mao said to his inner circle in November 1958: "Working like this, with all these projects, half of China may well have to die. If not half, one-third, or one-tenth50 milliondie."[256]

Thomas Bernstein of Columbia University argues that this quotation is taken out of context, claiming:

The Chinese original, however, is not quite as shocking. In the speech, Mao talks about massive earthmoving irrigation projects and numerous big industrial ones, all requiring huge numbers of people. If the projects, he said, are all undertaken simultaneously "half of China's population unquestionably will die; and if it's not half, it'll be a third or ten percent, a death toll of 50 million people." Mao then pointed to the example of Guangxi provincial Party secretary, Chn Mnyun (h) who had been dismissed in 1957 for failing to prevent famine in the previous year, adding: "If with a death toll of 50 million you didn't lose your jobs, I at least should lose mine; whether I should lose my head would also be in question. Anhui wants to do so much, which is quite all right, but make it a principle to have no deaths."[257]

Jasper Becker notes, "archive material gathered by Dik?tter ... confirms that far from being ignorant or misled about the famine, the Chinese leadership were kept informed about it all the time. And he exposes the extent of the violence used against the peasants":[258]

Mass killings are not usually associated with Mao and the Great Leap Forward, and China continues to benefit from a more favourable comparison with Cambodia or the Soviet Union. But as fresh and abundant archival evidence shows, coercion, terror and systematic violence were the foundation of the Great Leap, and between 1958 to 1962, by a rough approximation, some 6 to 8 per cent of those who died were tortured to death or summarily killedamounting to at least 3 million victims.

Countless others were deliberately deprived of food and consequently starved to death. Many more vanished because they were too old, weak or sick to workand hence unable to earn their keep. People were killed selectively because they had the wrong class background, because they dragged their feet, because they spoke out or simply because they were not liked, for whatever reason, by the man who wielded the ladle in the canteen.

Dik?tter argues that CPC leaders "glorified violence and were inured to massive loss of life. And all of them shared an ideology in which the end justified the means. In 1962, having lost millions of people in his province, Li Jingquan compared the Great Leap Forward to the Long March in which only one in ten had made it to the end: 'We are not weak, we are stronger, we have kept the backbone.'"[259]

Regarding the large-scale irrigation projects, Dik?tter stresses that, in spite of Mao being in a good position to see the human cost, they continued unabated for several years, and ultimately claimed the lives of hundreds of thousands of exhausted villagers. He also notes that "In a chilling precursor of Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge, villagers in Qingshui and Gansu called these projects the 'killing fields'."[260]


Mao greets United States President Richard Nixon during his visit to China in 1972
The United States placed a trade embargo on the People's Republic as a result of its involvement in the Korean War, lasting until Richard Nixon decided that developing relations with the PRC would be useful in dealing with the Soviet Union.

The television series Biography stated: "[Mao] turned China from a feudal backwater into one of the most powerful countries in the World ... The Chinese system he overthrew was backward and corrupt; few would argue the fact that he dragged China into the 20th century. But at a cost in human lives that is staggering."[244]

In the book China in the 21st Century: What Everyone Needs to Know published in 2010, Professor Jeffrey N. Wasserstrom of the University of California, Irvine compares Chinas relationship to Mao Zedong to Americans' remembrance of Andrew Jackson: both countries regard the leaders in a positive light, despite their respective roles in devastating policies. Jackson forcibly moved Native Americans, resulting in thousands of deaths, while Mao was at the helm during the violent years of the Cultural Revolution and the Great Leap Forward:[261]

Though admittedly far from perfect, the comparison is based on the fact that Jackson is remembered both as someone who played a significant role in the development of a political organization (the Democratic Party) that still has many partisans, and as someone responsible for brutal policies toward Native Americans that are now referred to as genocidal.

Both men are thought of as having done terrible things yet this does not necessarily prevent them from being used as positive symbols. And Jackson still appears on $20 bills, even though Americans tend to view as heinous the institution of slavery (of which he was a passionate defender) and the early 19th-century military campaigns against Native Americans (in which he took part).

At times Jackson, for all his flaws, is invoked as representing an egalitarian strain within the American democratic tradition, a self-made man of the people who rose to power via straight talk and was not allied with moneyed interests. Mao stands for something roughly similar.[262]

Mao's military writings continue to have a large amount of influence both among those who seek to create an insurgency and those who seek to crush one, especially in manners of guerilla warfare, at which Mao is popularly regarded as a genius.[citation needed] As an example, the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) followed Mao's examples of guerilla warfare to considerable political and military success even in the 21st century.[citation needed] Mao's major contribution to the military science is his theory of People's War, with not only guerrilla warfare but more importantly, Mobile Warfare methodologies. Mao had successfully applied Mobile Warfare in the Korean War, and was able to encircle, push back and then halt the UN forces in Korea, despite the clear superiority of UN firepower.[citation needed] Mao also gave the impression that he might even welcome a nuclear war.[263]


Statue of Mao in Lijiang
"Let us imagine how many people would die if war breaks out. There are 2.7 billion people in the world, and a third could be lost. If it is a little higher, it could be half ... I say that if the worst came to the worst and one-half dies, there will still be one-half left, but imperialism would be razed to the ground and the whole world would become socialist. After a few years there would be 2.7 billion people again"[264]

But historians dispute the sincerity of Mao's words. Robert Service says that Mao "was deadly serious,"[265] while Frank Dik?tter claims that "He was bluffing ... the sabre-rattling was to show that he, not Khrushchev, was the more determined revolutionary."[264]

Mao's poems and writings are frequently cited by both Chinese and non-Chinese. The official Chinese translation of President Barack Obama's inauguration speech used a famous line from one of Mao's poems.[266] Republican senator John McCain misattributed a campaign quote to Mao several times during his 2008 presidential election bid, saying "Remember the words of Chairman Mao: 'It's always darkest before it's totally black.'"

The ideology of Maoism has influenced many Communists, mainly in the Third World, including revolutionary movements such as Cambodia's Khmer Rouge,[267] Peru's Shining Path, and the Nepalese revolutionary movement. Under the influence of Mao's agrarian socialism and Cultural Revolution, Cambodia's Pol Pot conceived of his disastrous Year Zero policies which purged the nation of its teachers, artists and intellectuals and emptied its cities, resulting in the Cambodian Genocide.[268]

The Revolutionary Communist Party, USA also claims MarxismCLeninism-Maoism as its ideology, as do other Communist Parties around the world which are part of the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement. China itself has moved sharply away from Maoism since Mao's death, and most people outside of China who describe themselves as Maoist regard the Deng Xiaoping reforms to be a betrayal of Maoism, in line with Mao's view of "Capitalist roaders" within the Communist Party.[citation needed]

As the Chinese government instituted free market economic reforms starting in the late 1970s and as later Chinese leaders took power, less recognition was given to the status of Mao. This accompanied a decline in state recognition of Mao in later years in contrast to previous years when the state organised numerous events and seminars commemorating Mao's 100th birthday. Nevertheless, the Chinese government has never officially repudiated the tactics of Mao. Deng Xiaoping, who was opposed to the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution, has to a certain extent rejected Mao's legacy, famously saying that Mao was "70% right and 30% wrong".

In the mid-1990s, Mao Zedong's picture began to appear on all new renminbi () currency from the People's Republic of China. This was officially instituted as an anti-counterfeiting measure as Mao's face is widely recognised in contrast to the generic figures that appear in older currency. On March 13, 2006, a story in the People's Daily reported that a proposal had been made to print the portraits of Sun Yat-sen and Deng Xiaoping.[269]

In 2006, the government in Shanghai issued a new set of high school history textbooks which omit Mao, with the exception of a single mention in a section on etiquette. Students in Shanghai now only learn about Mao in junior high school.[270]

Public image
Mao gave contradicting statements on the subject of personality cults. In 1955, as a response to the Khrushchev Report that criticised Joseph Stalin, Mao stated that personality cults are "poisonous ideological survivals of the old society", and reaffirmed China's commitment to collective leadership.[271] But at the 1958 Party congress in Chengdu, Mao expressed support for the personality cults of people whom he labelled as genuinely worthy figures; not those that expressed "blind worship".[272]

In 1962, Mao proposed the Socialist Education Movement (SEM) in an attempt to educate the peasants to resist the "temptations" of feudalism and the sprouts of capitalism that he saw re-emerging in the countryside from Liu's economic reforms.[citation needed] Large quantities of politicised art were produced and circulated  with Mao at the centre. Numerous posters, badges and musical compositions referenced Mao in the phrase "Chairman Mao is the red sun in our hearts" (t, Mo Zhx Sh Wmen Xnzhng De Hng Tiyng)[273] and a "Savior of the people" (, Rnmn De D Jixng).[273]

In October 1966, Mao's Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung, which was known as the Little Red Book was published. Party members were encouraged to carry a copy with them and possession was almost mandatory as a criterion for membership. Over the years, Mao's image became displayed almost everywhere, present in homes, offices and shops. His quotations were typographically emphasised by putting them in boldface or red type in even the most obscure writings. Music from the period emphasised Mao's stature, as did children's rhymes. The phrase "Long Live Chairman Mao for ten thousand years" was commonly heard during the era.[274]


A line to enter Mao Zedong Mausoleum
Mao also has a presence in China and around the world in popular culture, where his face adorns everything from T-shirts to coffee cups. Mao's granddaughter, Kong Dongmei, defended the phenomenon, stating that "it shows his influence, that he exists in people's consciousness and has influenced several generations of Chinese people's way of life. Just like Che Guevara's image, his has become a symbol of revolutionary culture."[254] Since 1950, over 40 million people have visited Mao's birthplace in Shaoshan, Hunan.[275]

Genealogy
Ancestors
His ancestors were:

Mo Ychng (O, born Xiangtan October 15, 1870, died Shaoshan January 23, 1920), father, courtesy name Mo Shnshng () or also known as Mao Jen-sheng
Wn Qmi(, born Xiangxiang 1867, died October 5, 1919), mother. She was illiterate and a devout Buddhist. She was a descendant of Wen Tianxiang.
Mo np (, born May 22, 1846, died November 23, 1904), paternal grandfather
ne Lu (_), paternal grandmother (given name not recorded)[276]
Mo Zrn (), paternal great-grandfather
Wives

Mao with Jiang Qing and daughter Li Na, 1940s
Mao Zedong had four wives who gave birth to a total of 10 children. They were:

Luo Yixiu (_, October 20, 1889 C 1910) of Shaoshan: married 1907 to 1910
Yang Kaihui (_, 1901C1930) of Changsha: married 1921 to 1927, executed by the KMT in 1930; mother to Mao Anying, Mao Anqing, and Mao Anlong
He Zizhen (R, 1910C1984) of Jiangxi: married May 1928 to 1939; mother to Mao Anhong, Li Min, and four other children
Jiang Qing (, 1914C1991), married 1939 to Mao's death; mother to Li Na
Siblings
He had several siblings:

Mao Zemin (, 1895C1943), younger brother, executed by a warlord
Mao Zetan (, 1905C1935), younger brother, executed by the KMT
Mao Zejian (, 1905C1929), adopted sister, executed by the KMT
Mao Zedong's parents altogether had five sons and two daughters. Two of the sons and both daughters died young, leaving the three brothers Mao Zedong, Mao Zemin, and Mao Zetan. Like all three of Mao Zedong's wives, Mao Zemin and Mao Zetan were communists. Like Yang Kaihui, both Zemin and Zetan were killed in warfare during Mao Zedong's lifetime.
Note that the character z () appears in all of the siblings' given names. This is a common Chinese naming convention.

From the next generation, Zemin's son, Mao Yuanxin, was raised by Mao Zedong's family. He became Mao Zedong's liaison with the Politburo in 1975. In Li Zhisui's The Private Life of Chairman Mao, Mao Yuanxin played a role in the final power-struggles.[277]

Children
Mao Zedong had a total of ten children,[278] including:

Mao Anying (, 1922C1950): son to Yang, married to Li Sq (R), who was born Li Sngln (), killed in action during the Korean War
Mao Anqing (, 1923C2007): son to Yang, married to Shao Hua (A), grandson Mao Xinyu (), great-grandson Mao Dongdong
Mao Anlong (1927C1931): son to Yang, died during the Chinese Civil War
Mao Anhong (1932C1935?): son to He, left to Mao's younger brother Zetan and then to one of Zetan's guards when he went off to war, was never heard of again
Li Min (, b. 1936): daughter to He, married to Kng Lnghu (A), son Kng Jnng (^), daughter Kng Dngmi ()
Li Na (G, Pinyin: L? N, b. 1940): daughter to Jiang (whose birth surname was L, a name also used by Mao while evading the KMT), married to Wng Jngqng (), son Wng Xiozh ()
Mao's first and second daughters were left to local villagers because it was too dangerous to raise them while fighting the Kuomintang and later the Japanese. Their youngest daughter (born in early 1938 in Moscow after Mao separated) and one other child (born 1933) died in infancy. Two English researchers who retraced the entire Long March route in 2002C2003[279] located a woman whom they believe might well be one of the missing children abandoned by Mao to peasants in 1935. Ed Jocelyn and Andrew McEwen hope a member of the Mao family will respond to requests for a DNA test.[280]

Through his ten children, Mao became grandfather to twelve grandchildren, many of whom he never knew. He has many great-grandchildren alive today. One of his granddaughters is businesswoman Kong Dongmei, one of the richest people in China and mother to three of Mao's great-grandchildren.[281] His grandson Mao Xinyu (Kong's half-brother), father of two, is a general in the Chinese army,[282] and is often ridiculed for his weight within China.[283]

Personal life

Mao Zedong and Zhang Yufeng in 1964
Mao's private life was very secretive at the time of his rule. However, after Mao's death, Li Zhisui, his personal physician, published The Private Life of Chairman Mao, a memoir which mentions some aspects of Mao's private life, such as chain-smoking cigarettes, rare bathing or dental habits, laziness, addiction to sleeping pills and large number of sexual partners.[284] Some scholars and some other people who also personally knew and worked with Mao, however, have disputed the accuracy of these characterisations.[285]

Having grown up in Hunan, Mao spoke Mandarin with a marked Hunanese accent.[286] Ross Terrill noted Mao was a "son of the soil ... rural and unsophisticated" in origins,[287] while Clare Hollingworth asserted he was proud of his "peasant ways and manners", having a strong Hunanese accent and providing "earthy" comments on sexual matters.[286] Lee Feigon noted that Mao's "earthiness" meant that he remained connected to "everyday Chinese life."[288]

Biographer Peter Carter described Mao as having "an attractive personality" who could for much of the time be a "moderate and balanced man", but noted that he could also be ruthless, and showed no mercy to his opponents.[122] This description was echoed by Sinologist Stuart Schram, who emphasised Mao's ruthlessness, but who also noted that he showed no sign of taking pleasure in torture or killing in the revolutionary cause.[119] Lee Feigon considered Mao "draconian and authoritarian" when threatened, but opined that he was not the "kind of villain that his mentor Stalin was".[289] Alexander Pantsov and Steven I. Levine claimed that Mao was a "man of complex moods", who "tried his best to bring about prosperity and gain international respect" for China, being "neither a saint nor a demon."[290] They noted that in early life, he strived to be "a strong, wilful, and purposeful hero, not bound by any moral chains", and that he "passionately desired fame and power".[291] Carter noted that throughout his life, Mao had the ability to gain people's trust, and that as such he gathered around him "an extraordinarily wide range of friends" in his early years.[292]

Writings and calligraphy

Mao's calligraphy: a bronze plaque of a poem by Li Bai. (Chinese: |~
Mao was a prolific writer of political and philosophical literature.[293] He is the attributed author of Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung, known in the West as the "Little Red Book" and in Cultural Revolution China as the "Red Treasure Book" (t): first published in January 1964, this is a collection of short extracts from his many speeches and articles, edited by Lin Biao and ordered topically. Mao wrote several other philosophical treatises, both before and after he assumed power. These include:

On Guerrilla Warfare (); 1937
On Practice (`); 1937
On Contradiction (); 1937
On Protracted War (); 1938
In Memory of Norman Bethune (o); 1939
On New Democracy (x); 1940
Talks at the Yan'an Forum on Literature and Art (v); 1942
Serve the People (); 1944
The Foolish Old Man Who Removed the Mountains (); 1945
On the Correct Handling of the Contradictions Among the People (_}); 1957
Mao was also a skilled Chinese calligrapher with a highly personal style. In China, Mao was considered a master calligrapher during his lifetime.[294] His calligraphy can be seen today throughout mainland China.[295] His work gave rise to a new form of Chinese calligraphy called "Mao-style" or Maoti, which has gained increasing popularity since his death. There currently exist various competitions specialising in Mao-style calligraphy.[296]

Literary works
Main article: Poetry of Mao Zedong

Mao's calligraphy of his poem "Qingyuanchun Changsha"
As did most Chinese intellectuals of his generation, Mao's education began with Chinese classical literature. Mao told Edgar Snow in 1936 that he had started the study of the Confucian Analects and the Four Books at a village school when he was eight, but that the books he most enjoyed reading were Water Margin, Journey to the West, the Romance of the Three Kingdoms and Dream of the Red Chamber.[297] Mao published poems in classical forms starting in his youth and his abilities as a poet contributed to his image in China after he came to power in 1949. His style was influenced by the great Tang dynasty poets Li Bai and Li He.[298]

Some of his most well-known poems are Changsha (1925), The Double Ninth (1929.10), Loushan Pass (1935), The Long March (1935), Snow (1936), The PLA Captures Nanjing (1949), Reply to Li Shuyi (1957.05.11) and Ode to the Plum Blossom (1961.12).

Portrayal in film and television
Mao has been portrayed in film and television numerous times. Some notable actors include: Han Shi, the first actor ever to have portrayed Mao, in a 1978 drama Dielianhua and later again in a 1980 film Cross the Dadu River;[299] Gu Yue, who had portrayed Mao 84 times on screen throughout his 27-year career and had won the Best Actor title at the Hundred Flowers Awards in 1990 and 1993;[300][301] Liu Ye, who played a young Mao in The Founding of a Party (2011);[302] Tang Guoqiang, who has frequently portrayed Mao in more recent times, in the films The Long March (1996) and The Founding of a Republic (2009), and the television series Huang Yanpei (2010), among others.[303] Mao is a principal character in American composer John Adams' opera Nixon in China (1987). The Beatles' song "Revolution" refers to Mao: "...but if you go carrying pictures of Chairman Mao you ain't going to make it with anyone anyhow...";[304] John Lennon expressed regret over including these lines in the song in 1972.[305]

Mao and Tibet
See also: Sinicization of Tibet
After Mao Zedong won the Chinese civil war in 1949, his goal became the unification of the "five nationalities" under the big family, the People's Republic of China, and under a single political system, the Communist Party of China.[306] Aware of Mao's vision, the Tibetan government in Lhasa sent a representative, Ngabo, to Chamdo, Kham, a strategically high valued town near the border. Ngabo had orders to hold the position while reinforcements were coming from the Lhasa and fight off the Chinese.[307] On October 16, 1950, news came that the People's Liberation Army was advancing towards Chamdo and had also taken another strategic town named, Riwoche, which could block the route to Lhasa.[308] With new orders, Ngabo and his men retreated to a monastery where the People's Liberation Army finally surrounded and captured them,[309] though they were treated with respect.[309] Ngabo wrote to Lhasa suggesting a peaceful surrender instead of war.[310] During the negotiation, the Chinese negotiator laid the cards straight on the table, "It is up to you to choose whether Tibet would be liberated peacefully or by force. It is only a matter of sending a telegram to the PLA group to recommence their march to Lhasa."[311] Ngabo accepted Mao's "Seventeen-Point Agreement", which constituted Tibet as part of the People's Republic China, in return for which Tibet would be granted autonomy.[312] In the face of discouraging lack of support from the rest of the world, the Dalai Lama on August 1951, sent a telegram to Mao accepting the Seventeen-Point Agreement.[313] However the delegates signing the agreement were forced to do so and the Tibetan's Government's seal used was forged.[314]

See also
icon	China portal
	Biography portal
	Communism portal
Chairman Mao badge
Mao's Great Famine
Mao Tse-tung: Ruler of Red China
Mao suit
References
Citations
Jump up ^ "Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party Since the Founding of the . People's Republic of China," (Adopted by the Sixth Plenary Session of the Eleventh Central Committee of the Communist Party of China on June 27, 1981 Resolution on CPC History (1949C81). (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 1981). p. 32.
Jump up ^ "Mao Zedong". The Oxford Companion to Politics of the World. Archived from the original on March 21, 2006. Retrieved August 23, 2008.
Jump up ^ Short 2001, p. 630 "Mao had an extraordinary mix of talents: he was visionary, statesman, political and military strategist of cunning intellect, a philosopher and poet."
Jump up ^ "Chinese Leader Mao Zedong / Part I". Retrieved 2 April 2015.
Jump up ^ The Cambridge Illustrated History of China, by Patricia Buckley Ebrey, Cambridge University Press, 2010, ISBN 0-521-12433-6, pp. 327
Jump up ^ Atlas of World History, by Patrick Karl O'Brien, Oxford University Press US, 2002, ISBN 0-19-521921-X, pp 254, link
^ Jump up to: a b c Short 2001, p. 631
Jump up ^ Rummel, R. J. China's Bloody Century: Genocide and Mass Murder Since 1900 Transaction Publishers, 1991. ISBN 0-88738-417-X p. 205: In light of recent evidence, Rummel has increased Mao's democide toll to 77 million; Daniel Jonah Goldhagen. Worse Than War: Genocide, Eliminationism, and the Ongoing Assault on Humanity. PublicAffairs, 2009. ISBN 1-58648-769-8 p. 53: "... the Chinese communists' murdering of a mind-boggling number of people, perhaps between 50 million and 70 million Chinese, and an additional 1.2 million Tibetans."
^ Jump up to: a b Fenby, J (2008). Modern China: The Fall and Rise of a Great Power, 1850 to the Present. Ecco Press. p. 351. ISBN 0-06-166116-3. Mao's responsibility for the extinction of anywhere from 40 to 70 million lives brands him as a mass killer greater than Hitler or Stalin, his indifference to the suffering and the loss of humans breathtaking
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 19; Hollingworth 1985, p. 15; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 11.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 19C20; Terrill 1980, pp. 4C5, 15; Feigon 2002, pp. 13C14; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 13C17.
^ Jump up to: a b Schram 1966, p. 20; Terrill 1980, p. 11; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 14, 17.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 20C21; Terrill 1980, p. 8; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 15, 20
Jump up ^ Terrill 1980, p. 12; Feigon 2002, p. 23, Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 25C28
Jump up ^ Feigon 2002, p. 15 Terrill 1980, pp. 10C11
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 23; Terrill 1980, pp. 12C13; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 21
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 25; Terrill 1980, pp. 20C21; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 29
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 22; Terrill 1980, p. 13; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 17C18
Jump up ^ Terrill 1980, p. 14; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 18
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 22; Feigon 2002, p. 15; Terrill 1980, p. 18; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 28
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 26; Terrill 1980, p. 19; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 28C30
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 26; Terrill 1980, pp. 22C23; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 30
Jump up ^ Carter 1976, pp. 18C19; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 32C34
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 27;Terrill 1980, p. 22; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 33
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 26C27; Terrill 1980, pp. 22C24; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 33
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 26; Terrill 1980, p. 23; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 33
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 30C32; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 32C35
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 34; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 34C35
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 34C35; Terrill 1980, pp. 23C24
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 35C36; Terrill 1980, pp. 22, 25; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 35.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 36; Terrill 1980, p. 26; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 35C36.
Jump up ^ Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 36C37.
Jump up ^ Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 40C41.
Jump up ^ Carter 1976, p. 26; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 36.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 36C37; Terrill 1980, p. 27; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 37.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 38C39
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 41; Terrill 1980, p. 32; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 42.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 40C41; Terrill 1980, pp. 30C31.
Jump up ^ Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 43; see also Hsiao Yu (Xiao Yu, alias of Xiao Zisheng). Mao Tse-Tung and I Were Beggars. (Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse University Press, 1959).
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 42C43; Terrill 1980, p. 32; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 48.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 43; Terrill 1980, p. 32; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 49C50.
Jump up ^ Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 49C50.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 44; Terrill 1980, p. 33; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 50C52.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 45; Terrill 1980, p. 34; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 52.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 48; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 47, 56C57.
Jump up ^ Feigon 2002, p. 18; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 39.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 48; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 59.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 47; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 59C62.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 48C49; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 62C64.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 48; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 57C58.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 48; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 62, 66.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 50C52; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 66.
Jump up ^ Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 66C67.
Jump up ^ Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 68C70.
Jump up ^ Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 68.
Jump up ^ Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 76.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 53C54; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 71C76.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 55; Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 76C77.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 55C56; Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 79.
Jump up ^ Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 80.
Jump up ^ Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 81C83.
Jump up ^ Pantsov & Levine 2012, p. 84.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 56C57.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 63; Feigon 2002, pp. 23, 28
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 64
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 63C64; Feigon 2002, pp. 23C24, 28, 30
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 64C66.
^ Jump up to: a b Schram 1966, p. 68
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 68C69
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 69.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 69C70
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 73C74; Feigon 2002, p. 33
Jump up ^ Elizabeth J. Perry,"Anyuan: Mining China's Revolutionary Tradition," The Asia-Pacific Journal 11.1 (January 14, 2013), reprinting Ch 2 of Elizabeth J. Perry. Anyuan: Mining China's Revolutionary Tradition. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2012. ISBN 978-0-520-27189-0.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 74C76
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 76C82
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 78.
Jump up ^ Mao Zedong (1992), Schram, Stuart Reynolds; et al., eds., National Revolution and Social Revolution, December 1920CJune 1927, Mao's Road to Power, Vol. II, M.E. Sharpe, p. 465.
Jump up ^ Liu Xiaoyuan (2004), Frontier Passages: Ethnopolitics and the Rise of Chinese Communism, 1921C1945, Stanford: Stanford University Press, p. 66.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 85, 87;
Jump up ^ Feigon 2002, p. 36
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 82, 90C91
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 83
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 84,89.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 87, 92C93; Feigon 2002, p. 39
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 95
Jump up ^ "Mao Zedong on War and Revolution". Quotations from Mao Zedong on War and Revolution. Columbia University. Retrieved November 12, 2011.; Feigon 2002, p. 41
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 98
^ Jump up to: a b Feigon 2002, p. 42
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 99C100
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 100
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 106; Carter 1976, pp. 61C62
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 112
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 106C109, 112C113
^ Jump up to: a b c Carter 1976, p. 62
^ Jump up to: a b Carter 1976, p. 64
^ Jump up to: a b c Carter 1976, p. 63
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 122C125; Feigon 2002, pp. 46C47
Jump up ^ Jung Chang and Jon Halliday, Mao: The Unknown Story, Random House 2005.
^ Jump up to: a b c Chang, Halliday; Mao, Chapt.5
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 125; Carter 1976, p. 68
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 130; Carter 1976, pp. 67C68; Feigon 2002, p. 48
^ Jump up to: a b Carter 1976, p. 69
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 126C127; Carter 1976, pp. 66C67
^ Jump up to: a b Carter 1976, p. 70
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 159; Feigon 2002, p. 47
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 131; Carter 1976, pp. 68C69
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 128, 132
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 133C137; Carter 1976, pp. 70C71
^ Jump up to: a b Feigon 2002, p. 50.
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 138; Carter 1976, pp. 71C72
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 138, 141
^ Jump up to: a b Carter 1976, p. 72
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 139
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 146C149
^ Jump up to: a b c Carter 1976, p. 75
^ Jump up to: a b Feigon 2002, p. 51
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 149C151
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 149
^ Jump up to: a b Schram 1966, p. 153
^ Jump up to: a b Schram 1966, p. 208
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 152
^ Jump up to: a b Carter 1976, p. 76
Jump up ^ Feigon 2002, pp. 51C53
^ Jump up to: a b Carter 1976, p. 77
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 154C155; Feigon 2002, pp. 54C55
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 155C161
^ Jump up to: a b Carter 1976, p. 78
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 161C165; Feigon 2002, pp. 53C54
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 166C168; Feigon 2002, p. 55
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 175C177; Carter 1976, pp. 80C81; Feigon 2002, pp. 56C57
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 180; Carter 1976, pp. 81C82
^ Jump up to: a b Feigon 2002, p. 57
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 180C181; Carter 1976, p. 83
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 181; Carter 1976, pp. 84C86; Feigon 2002, p. 58
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 183; Carter 1976, pp. 86C87
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 184C186; Carter 1976, pp. 88C90; Feigon 2002, pp. 59C60
Jump up ^ Carter 1976, pp. 90C91
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 186; Carter 1976, pp. 91C92; Feigon 2002, p. 60
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 187C188; Carter 1976, pp. 92C93
^ Jump up to: a b c Feigon 2002, p. 61
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 188; Carter 1976, p. 93
Jump up ^ Barnouin, Barbara and Yu Changgen. Zhou Enlai: A Political Life. Hong Kong: Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2006. ISBN 962-996-280-2. Retrieved March 12, 2011. p.62
^ Jump up to: a b Chang, Jung and Jon Halliday, Mao: The Unknown Story, Jonathan Cape 2005
^ Jump up to: a b c Chang, Halliday; Mao, Ch. 13
^ Jump up to: a b Schram 1966, p. 193
Jump up ^ Carter 1976, pp. 94C96
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 206C207
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 20
Jump up ^ Carter 1976, p. 101
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 202
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 209C210
Jump up ^ Carter 1976, p. 95
Jump up ^ Carter 1976, pp. 95C96
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 194
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 196
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 197
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 198C200; Carter 1976, pp. 98C99; Feigon 2002, pp. 64C65
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 211; Carter 1976, pp. 100C101
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 205
^ Jump up to: a b Carter 1976, p. 105
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 204; Feigon 2002, p. 66
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, p. 217
Jump up ^ Schram 1966, pp. 211C216; Carter 1976, pp. 101C10
Jump up ^ Jacobs, Andrew (October 2, 2009). "China Is Wordless on Traumas of Communists' Rise". The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2009.
^ Jump up to: a b Robert Palestini (2011). Going Back to the Future: A Leadership Journey for Educators. R&L Education. p. 170. ISBN 978-1-60709-586-6.
Jump up ^ Dorothy Perkins (19 November 2013). Encyclopedia of China: History and Culture. Routledge. p. 79. ISBN 978-1-135-93562-7.
Jump up ^ Cheek T, ed. (2002). Mao Zedong and China's Revolutions: A Brief History with Documents. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 125. ISBN 0-312-25626-4. The phrase is often mistakenly said to have been delivered during the speech from the Gate of Heavenly Peace, but was first used on September 21, at the First Plenary Session of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, then repeated on several occasions
Jump up ^ Li 1994, p. xi
Jump up ^ See for example, DeBorja, Q.M. and Xu L. Dong (eds) (1996). Manufacturing History: Sex, Lies and Random House's Memoirs of Mao's Physician. New York: China Study Group. p. 48.
Jump up ^ Burkitt, Laurie; Scobell, Andrew; Wortzel, Larry M. (July 2003). The lessons of history: The Chinese people's Liberation Army at 75 (PDF). Strategic Studies Institute. pp. 340C341. ISBN 1-58487-126-1.
Jump up ^ Short 2001, pp. 436C437
^ Jump up to: a b Kuisong 2008
Jump up ^ Steven W. Mosher. China Misperceived: American Illusions and Chinese Reality. Basic Books, 1992. ISBN 0-465-09813-4 pp 72, 73
Jump up ^ Stephen Rosskamm Shalom. Deaths in China Due to Communism. Center for Asian Studies Arizona State University, 1984. ISBN 0-939252-11-2 pg 24
Jump up ^ Spence 1999[page needed]. Mao got this number from a report submitted by Xu Zirong, Deputy Public Security Minister, which stated 712,000 counter-revolutionaries were executed, 1,290,000 were imprisoned, and another 1,200,000 were "subjected to control.": see Kuisong 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b Twitchett, Denis; John K. Fairbank; Roderick MacFarquhar (June 26, 1987). The Cambridge history of China. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-24336-X. Retrieved August 23, 2008.
Jump up ^ Maurice Meisner. Mao's China and After: A History of the People's Republic, Third Edition. Free, Press, 1999. ISBN 0-684-85635-2 p. 72: "... the estimate of many relatively impartial observers that there were 2,000,000 people executed during the first three years of the People's Republic is probably as accurate a guess as one can make on the basis of scanty information."
Jump up ^ Steven W. Mosher. China Misperceived: American Illusions and Chinese Reality. Basic Books, 1992. ISBN 0-465-09813-4 pg 74: "... a figure that Fairbank has cited as the upper range of "sober" estimates."
Jump up ^ Feigon 2002, p. 96: "By 1952 they had extended land reform throughout the countryside, but in the process somewhere between two and five million landlords had been killed."
Jump up ^ Short 2001, p. 436
^ Jump up to: a b Valentino 2004, pp. 121C122
Jump up ^ Changyu, Li. "Mao's "Killing Quotas." Human Rights in China (HRIC). September 26, 2005, at Shandong University" (PDF). Retrieved June 21, 2009.
Jump up ^ Brown, Jeremy. "Terrible Honeymoon: Struggling with the Problem of Terror in Early 1950s China".
Jump up ^ John Fairbank and Merle Goldman, China: A New History, (Cambridge: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2002), 349.
Jump up ^ Short 2001, p. 437
Jump up ^ "High Tide of Terror". Time. March 5, 1956. Retrieved May 11, 2009.
Jump up ^ Chang & Halliday 2005, p. 410
Jump up ^ Li 1994, pp. 198, 200, 468C469
^ Jump up to: a b Spence 1999[page needed]
Jump up ^ Smil, V. (1999). "China's great famine: 40 years later". BMJ (Clinical research ed.) 319 (7225): 1619C1621. doi:10.1136/bmj.319.7225.1619. PMC 1127087. PMID 10600969.
Jump up ^ Li 1994, pp. 283C4, 295
Jump up ^ Li 1994, p. 340
Jump up ^ Dik?tter, Frank (December 15, 2010). "Mao's Great Leap to Famine". International Herald Tribune.
Jump up ^ "Famine 2". web.mac.com. Archived from the original on 9 August 2011. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
Jump up ^ Becker, Jasper. "A utopian nightmare". The Spectator. Retrieved 15 January 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Thomas P., Bernstein (June 2006). "Mao Zedong and the Famine of 1959C1960: A Study in Wilfulness". The China Quarterly 186: 421C445. doi:10.1017/S0305741006000221. Retrieved 15 January 2015.
Jump up ^ Bernstein, Thomas P. "Book Reviews: Zhou Xun (ed), The Great Famine in China, 1958-1962: A Documentary History". China Perspectives. 2013/2 (Real Estate Speculation and its Social Consequences). Retrieved 15 January 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Becker 1998, p. 81
Jump up ^ Becker 1998, p. 86
Jump up ^ Becker 1998, p. 93
Jump up ^ Valentino 2004, p. 128
Jump up ^ Becker 1998, p. 103
^ Jump up to: a b c Chang & Halliday 2005, pp. 568, 579
Jump up ^ Becker 1998, pp. 92C93
Jump up ^ Valentino 2004, p. 127
^ Jump up to: a b Mark O'Neill. hunger for the truth: A new book, banned on the mainland, is becoming the definitive account of the Great Famine. South China Morning Post, July 6, 2008.
Jump up ^ Short 2001, p. 761
Jump up ^ Akbar, Arifa (September 17, 2010). "Mao's Great Leap Forward 'killed 45 million in four years'". The Independent (London). Retrieved September 20, 2010.; Dik?tter 2010, p. 333
^ Jump up to: a b "Source List and Detailed Death Tolls for the Twentieth Century Hemoclysm". Historical Atlas of the Twentieth Century. Retrieved August 23, 2008.
Jump up ^ Robert A. Scalapino, "Sino-Soviet Competition in Africa", Foreign Affairs (1964) 42#4 pp. 640-654 in JSTOR
Jump up ^ Lorenz M. Lthi (2010). The Sino-Soviet Split: Cold War in the Communist World. Princeton UP. p. 1.
Jump up ^ Becker, Jasper (2002). The Chinese. Oxford UP. p. 271.
Jump up ^ Feigon 2002, p. 140
Jump up ^ For a full treatment of this idea, see Gao 2008
Jump up ^ Jonathan Mirsky. Livelihood Issues. Literary Review
Jump up ^ MacFarquhar 2006, p. 110
Jump up ^ MacFarquhar 2006, p. 125
Jump up ^ MacFarquhar 2006, p. 124
Jump up ^ Ion Mihai Pacepa (November 28, 2006). "The Kremlin's Killing Ways". National Review. Retrieved August 23, 2008.
Jump up ^ Nipa Piboontanasawat (February 13, 2008). "China's Mao Offered to Send 10 Million Women to U.S. in 1973". Bloomberg. Retrieved July 28, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mao offered US 10 million women". The Australian. February 13, 2008. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
Jump up ^ Steve Jackson (February 13, 2008). "Papers reveal Mao's view of women". BBC News. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
Jump up ^ Alfreda Murck (2013). Mao's Golden Mangoes and the Cultural Revolution. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-3-85881-732-7.
Jump up ^ Cynthia Thuma (2001). The Mongo Mango Cookbook. Pineapple Press Inc. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-56164-239-7.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Andrew G. Walder (6 April 2015). China Under Mao. Harvard University Press. pp. 280C281. ISBN 978-0-674-05815-6.
^ Jump up to: a b c Melissa Schrift (2001), Biography of a Chairman Mao Badge: The Creation and Mass Consumption of a Personality Cult, Rutgers University Press, pp. 96C98, ISBN 978-0-8135-2937-0
^ Jump up to: a b c Moore, Malcolm (7 March 2013). "How China came to worship the mango during the Cultural Revolution". The Daily Telegraph (Beijing, China). Retrieved 28 January 2016.
^ Jump up to: a b Daniel Leese (31 October 2011), Mao Cult: Rhetoric and Ritual in China's Cultural Revolution, Cambridge University Press, pp. 221C222, ISBN 978-1-139-49811-1
Jump up ^ Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution lasting until 1976:
"Marxists.org Glossary: Cultural Revolution". Marxists.org. Encyclopedia of Marxism. Retrieved 6 October 2015.
"Cultural Revolution". History.com. Retrieved 6 October 2015.
"The Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution in China, 1966-1976". sjsu.edu. San Jos State University Department of Economics. Retrieved 6 October 2015.
Spence, Johnathan (2001). "Introduction to the Cultural Revolution (The Search for Modern China)" (PDF). iis-db.stanford.edu. Retrieved 6 October 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Parkinson's disease:
"Mao Tse-Tung Dies In Peking At 82; Leader Of Red China Revolution; Choice Of Successor Is Uncertain". The New York Times. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
"This Day in History: Mao Zedong Dies". History.com. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
"Mao Zedong". PBS. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
"Mao Tse-tung Biography". biography.com. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis:
Zhisui Li (23 February 2010). Private Life Of Chairman Mao: The Memoirs of Mao's Personal Physician (illustrated, reprint ed.). Random House. p. 581. ISBN 9781407059228. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
Nicholas Griffin (2 January 2014). Ping-Pong Diplomacy: Ivor Montagu and the Astonishing Story Behind the Game That Changed the World. Simon and Schuster. p. 163. ISBN 9780857207371. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
Eugene Sadler-Smith (15 June 2010). The Intuitive Mind: Profiting from the Power of Your Sixth Sense. John Wiley & Sons. p. 223. ISBN 9780470685389. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
William C. Triplett, II (14 February 2004). Rogue State: How a Nuclear North Korea Threatens America (illustrated ed.). Regnery Publishing. p. 224. ISBN 9780895260680. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b "The Kissenger Transcripts: Notes and Excerpts". nsarchive.gwu.edu. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
Jump up ^ Chirot 1996, p. 198
^ Jump up to: a b Gao 2008[page needed]; Feigon 2002[page needed]
Jump up ^ Daniel Leese, "Mao the Man and Mao the Icon" in Timothy Cheek, ed. (2010). A Critical Introduction to Mao. Cambridge University Press. p. 233.
Jump up ^ Heavy smoker:
Rebecca E. Karl (23 July 2010). Mao Zedong and China in the Twentieth-Century World: A Concise History. Duke University Press. p. 79. ISBN 9780822393023. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
Heather Timmons (30 December 2013). "The End of China's 'Ashtray Diplomacy'". The Atlantic. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
Johan Nylander (9 February 2014). "Stubbing out Mao's smoky legacy". Al Jazeera English. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
Jamie Florcruz (7 January 2011). "China clouded in cigarette smoke". CNN News. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mao Tse-Tung Dies In Peking At 82; Leader Of Red China Revolution; Choice Of Successor Is Uncertain". The New York Times. Retrieved 25 October 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Christine Quigley (1 April 1998). Modern Mummies: The Preservation of the Human Body in the Twentieth Century (illustrated, reprint ed.). McFarland. pp. 40C42. ISBN 9780786428519. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
Jump up ^ S. L. James. "China: Communist History Through Film". Internet Archive. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
Jump up ^ "1976: Chairman Mao Zedong dies". BBC News. 9 September 1976. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
Jump up ^ "Chinese Bid Farewell to Nation's Leader". Florence Times + Tri-Cities Daily. UPI. 18 September 1976. Retrieved 8 October 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mao Tse-Tung (1893 - 1976) - Find A Grave Memorial". findagrave.com. Retrieved July 28, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Big bad wolf". The Economist. 31 August 2006. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Biography (TV series) Mao Tse Tung: China's Peasant Emperor A&E Network 2005, ASIN B000AABKXG[time needed]
^ Jump up to: a b Gao 2008, p. 81
Jump up ^ "Chairman Mao square opened on his 115th birth anniversary". China Daily. December 25, 2008. Retrieved January 2, 2013.; "Mao Zedong still draws crowds on 113th birth anniversary". People's Daily. December 27, 2006. Retrieved January 2, 2013.
Jump up ^ MacFarquhar 2006, p. 471: "Together with Joseph Stalin and Adolf Hitler, Mao appears destined to go down in history as one of the great tyrants of the twentieth century"
^ Jump up to: a b Michael Lynch. Mao (Routledge Historical Biographies). Routledge, 2004. p. 230
Jump up ^ Stphane Courtois, Jean-Louis Margolin, et al. The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression. Harvard University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-674-07608-7 p. 465C466
Jump up ^ MacFarquhar & Schoenhals, 2006, p. 428.
Jump up ^ Mao Zedong sixiang wan sui! (1969), p. 195. Referenced in Governing China: From Revolution to Reform (Second Edition) by Kenneth Lieberthal. W.W. Norton & Co., 2003. ISBN 0-393-92492-0 p. 71.
Jump up ^ Mao Zedong. "Speeches At The Second Session Of The Eighth Party Congress". Retrieved 28 June 2016.
^ Jump up to: a b c Short 2001, p. 632
^ Jump up to: a b Granddaughter Keeps Mao's Memory Alive in Bookshop by Maxim Duncan, Reuters, September 28, 2009
Jump up ^ Jonathan Watts. "China must confront dark past, says Mao confidant" The Guardian, June 2, 2005
Jump up ^ Chang & Halliday 2005, p. 458 [Chang's source (p.725): *Mao CCRM, vol. 13, pp. 203C4 (E: MacFarquhar et al., pp. 494C5)].
Jump up ^ Bernstein, Thomas III (July 2006). "Mao Zedong and the Famine of 1959C1960: A Study in Wilfulness". The China Quarterly 186: 421C445. doi:10.1017/S0305741006000221.
Jump up ^ Jasper Becker. Systematic genocide. The Spectator, September 25, 2010.
Jump up ^ Dik?tter 2010, p. 299
Jump up ^ Dik?tter 2010, p. 33
Jump up ^ "BOOK REVIEWS: What Everyone Needs to Know about China and Burma". Zocalo Public Square. Retrieved 8 February 2015.
Jump up ^ "Some China Book Notes". Matt Schiavenza.com. Retrieved 8 February 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mao Tse-Tung: Father of Chinese Revolution". The New York Times. September 10, 1976
^ Jump up to: a b Dik?tter 2010, p. 13
Jump up ^ Robert Service. Comrades!: A History of World Communism. Harvard University Press, 2007. p. 321. ISBN 0-674-02530-X
Jump up ^ "WRf |~". People's Daily. 22 January 2009. Archived from the original on 27 August 2009. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
Jump up ^ Robert Jackson Alexander. International Maoism in the developing world. Praeger, 1999. p 200.; Jackson, Karl D (March 17, 1992). Cambodia, 1975C1978: Rendezvous with Death. Princeton University Press. p. 219. ISBN 0-691-02541-X.
Jump up ^ Biography (TV series): Pol Pot; A&E Network, 2003.
Jump up ^ "Portraits of Sun Yat-sen, Deng Xiaoping proposed adding to RMB notes". People's Daily. March 13, 2006. Retrieved August 23, 2008.
Jump up ^ Kahn, Joseph (September 2, 2006). "Where's Mao? Chinese Revise History Books". The New York Times. Retrieved February 28, 2007.
Jump up ^ Meisner, Maurice (2007). Mao Zedong: A Political and Intellectual Portrait. Polity. p. 133.
Jump up ^ "Cult of Mao". library.thinkquest.org. Retrieved August 23, 2008. This remark of Mao seems to have elements of truth but it is false. He confuses the worship of truth with a personality cult, despite there being an essential difference between them. But this remark played a role in helping to promote the personality cult that gradually arose in the CCP.
^ Jump up to: a b Chapter 5: "Mao Badges C Visual Imagery and Inscriptions" in: Helen Wang: Chairman Mao badges: symbols and Slogans of the Cultural Revolution (British Museum Research Publication 169). The Trustees of the British Museum, 2008. ISBN 978-0-86159-169-5.
Jump up ^ Lu, Xing (2004). Rhetoric of the Chinese Cultural Revolution: the impact on Chinese thought, Culture, and Communication. Univ of South Carolina Press. p. 65. ISBN 1-57003-543-1.
Jump up ^  (in Chinese). Shaoshan.gov.cn. Retrieved October 25, 2014.
Jump up ^ "_" literally transliterates as Luo Shi; the character "" in Chinese corresponds to the English word "clan", and was a term used in China when the given name of a woman was not recorded.
Jump up ^ Li 1994, p. 659
Jump up ^ Spence 1999[page needed]
Jump up ^ "Stepping into history". China Daily. November 23, 2003. Retrieved August 23, 2008.
Jump up ^ The Long March, by Ed Jocelyn and Andrew McEwen. Constable 2006
Jump up ^ Kong Dongmei on China's rich list:
"Kong Dongmei, Granddaughter Of Mao Zedong, Appears On China Rich List". Agence France Presse (Huffington Post). 9 July 2015. Retrieved 29 July 2015.
Malcolm Moore (9 May 2013). "Mao's granddaughter accused over China rich list". The Telegraph (Beijing, China). Retrieved 29 July 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mao's grandson, promoted to major general, faces ridicule". Los Angeles Times. 4 August 2010. Retrieved 29 July 2015.
Jump up ^ Malcolm Moore (9 May 2013). "Mao's granddaughter accused over China rich list". The Telegraph (Beijing, China). Retrieved 29 July 2015. But Mao Xinyu, the Chairman's only grandson, a podgy major general in the People's Liberation Army, had previously promised that "the House of Mao will never engage in business".
Mao Xinyu is Ms Kong's half-brother; his grandmother Yang Kaihui was Chairman Mao's second wife. Both he and Ms Kong have written books about their grandfather.
Jump up ^ Li, 1994.
Jump up ^ DeBorga and Dong 1996. p. 04.
^ Jump up to: a b Hollingworth 1985, pp. 29C30
Jump up ^ Terrill 1980, p. 19
Jump up ^ Feigon 2002, p. 26
Jump up ^ Feigon 2002, p. 53
Jump up ^ Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 5C6
Jump up ^ Pantsov & Levine 2012, pp. 42, 66
Jump up ^ Carter 1976, p. 42
Jump up ^ "Mao Zedong Thought C Part 1". Retrieved April 30, 2011.
Jump up ^ "100 years<!- Bot generated title ->". Retrieved August 23, 2008.
Jump up ^ Yen, Yuehping (2005). Calligraphy and Power in Contemporary Chinese Society. Routledge. p. 2.
Jump up ^ w. People (in Chinese). September 11, 2006.
Jump up ^ Willis Barnstone, The Poems of Mao Zedong (1972; rpr. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008 ISBN 0520935004), p. 3-4.
Jump up ^ Ng Yong-sang. "The Poetry of Mao Tse-tung". China Quarterly 13 (1963): 60C73.
Jump up ^ "Being Mao Zedong". Global Times. July 4, 2011. Retrieved March 15, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Famous actor playing Mao Zedong dies". People's Daily. July 5, 2005. Retrieved March 15, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Actor famous for playing Mao Zedong dies of miocardial infarction". People's Daily. July 5, 2005. Retrieved March 15, 2013.
Jump up ^ Liu, Wei (June 3, 2011). "The reel Mao". China Daily European Weekly. Retrieved March 15, 2013.
Jump up ^ Xiong, Qu (November 26, 2011). "Actors expect prosperity of Chinese culture". CCTV News. Retrieved March 15, 2013.
Jump up ^ Alan Aldridge; Beatles (1969). The Beatles Illustrated Lyrics. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 104. ISBN 0-395-59426-X.
Jump up ^ Spignesi, Stephen J.; Lewis, Michael (2004). Here, There, and Everywhere: The 100 Best Beatles Songs. New York: Black Dog. p. 40. ISBN 978-1-57912-369-7.
Jump up ^ Schaik 2011, p. 208
Jump up ^ Schaik 2011, p. 209
Jump up ^ Schaik 2011, p. 211
^ Jump up to: a b Schaik 2011, p. 212
Jump up ^ Schaik 2011, p. 213
Jump up ^ Schaik 2011, p. 214
Jump up ^ Schaik 2011, p. 215
Jump up ^ Schaik 2011, p. 218
Jump up ^ Laird, Thomas (2006). The story of Tibet: Conversations with the Dalai Lama. London: Atlantic Books. p. 307. ISBN 9781843541448. Retrieved 29 July 2015.
Further reading
Anita M. Andrew; John A. Rapp (1 January 2000). Autocracy and China's Rebel Founding Emperors: Comparing Chairman Mao and Ming Taizu. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 110C. ISBN 978-0-8476-9580-5.
Carter, Peter (1976). Mao. London: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0192731401.
Chang, Jung; Halliday, Jon (2005). Mao: The Unknown Story. London: Jonathan Cape. ISBN 978-0-224-07126-0.
Davin, Delia (2013). Mao: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford UP. ISBN 9780191654039.
Dik?tter, Frank (2010). Mao's Great Famine: The History of China's Most Devastating Catastrophe, 1958C62. London: Walker & Company. ISBN 0-8027-7768-6.
Feigon, Lee (2002). Mao: A Reinterpretation. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee. ISBN 978-1-56663-458-8.
Gao, Mobo (2008). The Battle for China's Past: Mao and the Cultural Revolution. London: Pluto Press. ISBN 978-0-7453-2780-8.
Hollingworth, Clare (1985). Mao and the Men Against Him. London: Jonathan Cape. ISBN 978-0224017602.
Li, Zhisui (1994). The Private Life of Chairman Mao: The Memoirs of Mao's Personal Physician. London: Random House. ISBN 978-0679764434.
MacFarquhar, Roderick; Schoenhals, Michael (2006). Mao's Last Revolution. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0674027480.
Pantsov, Alexander V.; Levine, Steven I. (2012). Mao: The Real Story. New York and London: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4516-5447-9.
Schaik, Sam (2011). Tibet: A History. New Haven: Yale University Press Publications. ISBN 978-0-300-15404-7.
Schram, Stuart (1966). Mao Tse-Tung. London: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-14-020840-5.
Short, Philip (2001). Mao: A Life. Owl Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-6638-8.
Terrill, Ross (1980). Mao: A Biography. Simon and Schuster., which is superseded by Ross Terrill. Mao: A Biography. (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-8047-2921-2 (pbk. alk. paper).
Becker, Jasper (1998). Hungry Ghosts: Mao's Secret Famine. Holt Paperbacks. ISBN 0-8050-5668-8.
Valentino, Benjamin A. (2004). Final Solutions: Mass Killing and Genocide in the Twentieth Century. Cornell University Press. ISBN 0-8014-3965-5.
Chirot, Daniel (1996). Modern tyrants: the power and prevalence of evil in our age. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-02777-3.
Spence, Jonathan (1999). Mao Zedong. Penguin Lives. New York: Viking Press. ISBN 978-0-670-88669-2. OCLC 41641238. Lay summary (February 6, 2000).
Kuisong, Yang (March 2008). "Reconsidering the Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries" (PDF). The China Quarterly (193): 102C121.
"Biography" (2005). Mao Tse Tung: China's Peasant Emperor (Television production). A&E Network. ASIN B000AABKXG. Retrieved January 18, 2013.
Schoppa, R. Keith. Twentieth Century China: A History in Documents. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2004.
Walder, Andrew G. China under Mao: A Revolution Derailed (Harvard University Press, 2015) 413 pp. online review
External links
Find more about
Mao Zedong
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Search Commons	Media from Commons
Search Wikiquote	Quotations from Wikiquote
Search Wikisource	Texts from Wikisource
General
Asia Source biography
ChineseMao.com: Extensive resources about Mao Zedong
CNN profile
Collected Works of Mao at the Maoist Internationalist Movement
Collected Works of Mao Tse-tung (1917C1949) Joint Publications Research Service
Mao quotations
Mao Zedong Reference Archive at marxists.org
Oxford Companion to World Politics: Mao Zedong
Spartacus Educational biography
Bio of Mao at the official Communist Party of China web site
Commentary
Discusses the life, military influence and writings of Chairman Mao ZeDong.
What Maoism Has Contributed
China must confront dark past, says Mao confidant
Mao was cruel C but also laid the ground for today's China
Comrade Mao C 44 Chinese posters of the 1950s C 70s
On the Role of Mao Zedong
Propaganda paintings showing Mao as the great leader of China
Remembering Mao's Victims
Mao Tse Tung: Leader, Killer, Icon
Mao's Great Leap to Famine
Finding the Facts About Mao's Victims
Remembering China's Great Helmsman
Did Mao Really Kill Millions in the Great Leap Forward?
Party political offices
Communist Party of China
Preceded by
Zhu De	Chairman of the CPC Central Military Commission
1936C1949	Succeeded by
Himself
as Post re-established
Preceded by
Zhang Wentian
as General Secretary	Leader of the Communist Party of China
1943C1976	Succeeded by
Hua Guofeng
Post established	Chairman of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
1945C1976
Preceded by
Himself
as Post re-established	Chairman of the CPC Central Military Commission
1954C1976	Succeeded by
Hua Guofeng
Political offices
Chinese Soviet Republic
New title	Chairman of the Central Executive Committee of the Chinese Soviet Republic
1931C1937	Chinese Soviet Republic disbanded
Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars of the Chinese Soviet Republic
1931C1934	Succeeded by
Zhang Wentian
People's Republic of China
New title	Chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference
1949C1954	Succeeded by
Zhou Enlai
Chairman of the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China
1949C1954	Succeeded by
Himself
as Chairman of the People's Republic of China
Chairman of the People's Revolutionary Military Council of the Central People's Government
1949C1954	Succeeded by
Himself
as Chairman of the National Defence Commission
Preceded by
Himself
as Chairman of the Central People's Government	Chairman of the People's Republic of China
1954C1959	Succeeded by
Liu Shaoqi
Academic offices
Preceded by
Deng Fa	President of the CPC Central Party School
1943C1947	Succeeded by
Liu Shaoqi
[show] v t e
Paramount leaders of the People's Republic of China
[show] v t e
General Secretaries and Chairmen of the Communist Party of China
[show] v t e
Heads of state of the People's Republic of China
[show] v t e
Chairmen of the Central Military Commission
[show] v t e
Chairmen of the National Committee of the CPPCC
[show] 
Links to related articles
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 51699962 LCCN: n78087649 ISNI: 0000 0001 2096 1122 GND: 118577425 SELIBR: 74212 SUDOC: 027545415 BNF: cb12007498s (data) BIBSYS: 90651454 ULAN: 500322044 MusicBrainz: 13cc0c36-3bc5-4452-8bb2-085ff9ca62d1 NLA: 36730817 NDL: 00315356 NKC: jn20000701142 NARA: 10580956 BNE: XX931335
Categories: General Secretaries and Chairmen of the Communist Party of ChinaMao Zedong1893 births1976 deathsHunan First Normal University alumniAnti-RevisionistsChinese atheistsChinese communistsChinese guerrillasChinese military writersChinese people of World War IIChinese political philosophersChinese revolutionariesCommunist Party of China politicians from HunanCommunist poetsCommunist rulersPeople of the Cultural RevolutionGuerrilla warfare theoristsMao Zedong familyMaoist theoristsMarxist theoristsPeking University facultyPeople from XiangtanPeople of the Chinese Civil WarPeople of the Xinhai RevolutionPeople with Parkinson's diseasePeople's Republic of China poetsPeople's Republic of China politicians from HunanPresidents of the People's Republic of ChinaRepublic of China writersPoets from Hunan20th-century philosophers20th-century Chinese poets20th-century Chinese writersPhilosophers from Hunan
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikisource
Languages
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
????
???????
Aragons
???????
Asturianu
Aymar aru
Az?rbaycanca
?????
Ban-lam-g
?

 (?)?
Bikol Central

Boarisch
???????
Bosanski
Brezhoneg

Catal
?
?e?tina
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
?
Espa?ol
Esperanto
Estreme?u
Euskara
?????
Fiji Hindi
F?royskt
Fran?ais
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gidhlig
Galego
MZ
Z/Hak-ka-ng?

???
???????
??????
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia

slenska
Italiano
?????
Basa Jawa
?????
???????
??
Kernowek
Kiswahili
Kurd?
Ladino
???? ??????
Latina
Latvie?u
Lietuvi?
La .lojban.
Magyar

Malagasy
??????
Malti
?????
?????????
????
Bahasa Melayu
Mng-d??ng-ng??

??????????
Nederlands
??????
Z

Norsk bokm?l
Norsk nynorsk
Occitan
O?zbekcha/?
??????
??????
Patois
Piemontis
Plattdtsch
Polski
Portugus
Ripoarisch
Roman?
Runa Simi


 
Smegiella
?????????
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Sloven?ina
Sloven??ina
Soomaaliga
?????? ???????
 / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / 
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
?????
/tatar?a
??????
???
Trk?e
?
????
???????? / Uyghurche
Vahcuengh
Vneto
Ti?ng Vi?t
V?ro
Walon

Winaray

??????
Yorb
Z
?emait??ka

??????
Edit links
This page was last modified on 27 July 2016, at 20:01.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
 Page semi-protected
Soviet Union
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from The Soviet Union)
"USSR", "CCCP", and "Soviet" redirect here. For other uses, see USSR (disambiguation), CCCP (disambiguation), and Soviet (disambiguation).
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
   
Soyuz Sovetskikh Sotsialisticheskikh Respublik
	1922C1991[1]	
	
Flag
(after 1980)	State Emblem
(after 1923)
Motto
  , !
(Translit.: Proletarii vsekh stran, soyedinyaytes'!)
English: Workers of the world, unite!
(literally: Proletarians of all countries, unite!)
Anthem
"The Internationale"
(1922C1944)
MENU0:00

"State Anthem of the Soviet Union"
(1944C1991)
MENU0:00

The Soviet Union after World War II, not including aligned countries.
Capital	Moscow
Languages	Russian (all-union official since 19902)
Religion	None (state atheism)[2] (see text)
Demonym	Soviet, Russian
Government	MarxistCLeninist one-party state[3][4][5][6] (until 1990)
Unitary semi-presidential republic (after 1990)
General Secretary	
 ? 	1922C1952	Joseph Stalin (first)
 ? 	1991	Vladimir Ivashko (last)
Head of state	
 ? 	1922C1938	Mikhail Kalinin (first)
 ? 	1988C1991	Mikhail Gorbachev (last)
Head of government	
 ? 	1922C1924	Vladimir Lenin (first)
 ? 	1991	Ivan Silayev (last)
Legislature	Supreme Soviet
 ? 	Upper house	Soviet of the Union
 ? 	Lower house	Soviet of Nationalities
Historical era	Interwar period / World War II / Cold War
 ? 	Treaty of Creation	30 December 1922
 ? 	Union dissolved	26 December 1991[1]
Area
 ? 	1991	22,402,200 km2 (8,649,538 sq mi)
Population
 ? 	1991 est.	293,047,571 
     Density	13.1 /km2  (33.9 /sq mi)
Currency	Soviet ruble () (SUR)
Internet TLD	.su1
Calling code	+7
Preceded by	Succeeded by
	Russian SFSR
	Transcaucasian SFSR
	Ukrainian SSR
	Byelorussian SSR
	Bukharan People's Soviet Republic
	Khorezm People's Soviet Republic
Russia	
Armenia	
Azerbaijan	
Belarus	
Estonia	
Georgia	
Kazakhstan	
Kyrgyzstan	
Latvia	
Lithuania	
Moldova	
Tajikistan	
Turkmenistan	
Ukraine	
Uzbekistan	
Today part of	 Armenia
 Azerbaijan
 Belarus
 China (parts disputed)
 Estonia
 Georgia
 Kazakhstan
 Kyrgyzstan
 Latvia
 Lithuania
 Moldova
 Mongolia
 Poland
 Russia
 Tajikistan
 Turkmenistan
 Ukraine
 Uzbekistan
Notes
^ Assigned on 19 September 1990, existing onwards.
^ Constituent republics had right to declare their own official languages
For details on the succession of states see below.
The Soviet Union (Russian: ? ?, tr. Sovetskij Sojuz; IPA: [s?'v?etsk??j s??j?s]), officially the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (Russian: ? ? ? ?, tr. Soyuz Sovetskikh Sotsialisticheskikh Respublik; IPA: [s??jus s??v??tsk??x s?ts??l??s?t?it??sk??x r???spubl??k] ( listen)), abbreviated to USSR (Russian: , tr. SSSR), was a socialist state on the Eurasian continent that existed from 1922 to 1991. A union of multiple subnational Soviet republics, its government and economy were highly centralized. The Soviet Union was a one-party state, governed by the Communist Party with Moscow as its capital.

The Soviet Union had its roots in the October Revolution of 1917, when the Bolsheviks, headed by Vladimir Lenin, overthrew the provisional government that had replaced the Tsar. They established the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic (renamed Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic in 1936), beginning a civil war between the revolutionary "Reds" and the counter-revolutionary "Whites." The Red Army entered several territories of the former Russian Empire and helped local Communists take power through soviets, which nominally acted on behalf of workers and peasants. In 1922, the Communists were victorious, forming the Soviet Union with the unification of the Russian, Transcaucasian, Ukrainian, and Byelorussian republics. Following Lenin's death in 1924, a troika and a brief power struggle, Joseph Stalin came to power in the mid-1920s. Stalin suppressed all political opposition to his rule, committed the state ideology to MarxismCLeninism (which he created), and initiated a centrally planned economy. As a result, the country underwent a period of rapid industrialization and collectivization which laid the foundation for its victory in World War II and post-war dominance of Eastern Europe. Stalin also fomented political paranoia, and conducted the Great Purge to remove opponents of his from the Communist Party through the mass arbitrary arrest of many people (military leaders, Communist Party members, and ordinary citizens alike) who were then sent to correctional labor camps or sentenced to death.

At the beginning of World War II, Stalin signed a non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany; the treaty delayed confrontation between the two countries. In June 1941 the Germans invaded, opening the largest and bloodiest theater of war in history. Soviet war casualties accounted for the highest proportion of the conflict in the cost of acquiring the upper hand over Axis forces at intense battles such as Stalingrad. Soviet forces eventually captured Berlin in 1945. The territory overtaken by the Red Army became satellite states of the Eastern Bloc. The Cold War emerged in 1947 as the Soviet bloc confronted the Western states that united in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 1949.

Following Stalin's death in 1953, a period of political and economic liberalization, known as "de-Stalinization" and "Khrushchev's Thaw", occurred under the leadership of Nikita Khrushchev. The country developed rapidly, as millions of peasants were moved into industrialized cities. The USSR took an early lead in the Space Race with the first ever satellite and the first human spaceflight. In the 1970s, there was a brief dtente of relations with the United States, but tensions resumed when the Soviet Union deployed troops in Afghanistan in 1979. The war drained economic resources and was matched by an escalation of American military aid to Mujahideen fighters.

In the mid-1980s, the last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, sought to further reform and liberalize the economy through his policies of glasnost and perestroika. The goal was to preserve the Communist Party while reversing economic stagnation. The Cold War ended during his tenure, and in 1989 Soviet satellite countries in Eastern Europe overthrew their respective communist regimes. This led to the rise of strong nationalist and separatist movements inside the USSR as well. Central authorities initiated a referendumboycotted by the Baltic republics, Armenia, Georgia, and Moldovawhich resulted in the majority of participating citizens voting in favor of preserving the Union as a renewed federation. In August 1991, a coup d'tat was attempted by Communist Party hardliners. It failed, with Russian President Boris Yeltsin playing a high-profile role in facing down the coup, resulting in the banning of the Communist Party. On 25 December 1991, Gorbachev resigned and the remaining twelve constituent republics emerged from the dissolution of the Soviet Union as independent post-Soviet states. The Russian Federation is the legal successor of the USSR.[7][8][9]

Contents  [hide] 
1	Geography, climate and environment
2	History
2.1	Revolution and foundation
2.2	Unification of republics
2.3	Stalin era
2.3.1	1930s
2.3.2	World War II
2.3.3	Cold War
2.4	Khrushchev era
2.5	Brezhnev era
2.6	Gorbachev era
2.7	Dissolution
2.8	Post-Soviet states
3	Politics
3.1	Communist Party
3.2	Government
3.3	Separation of power and reform
3.4	Judicial system
4	Administrative divisions
5	Economy
5.1	Energy
5.2	Science and technology
5.3	Transport
6	Demographics
6.1	Education
6.2	Ethnic groups
6.3	Health
6.4	Language
6.5	Religion
6.6	Women
7	Culture
8	See also
9	References
10	Bibliography
11	Further reading
11.1	Surveys
11.2	Lenin and Leninism
11.3	Stalin and Stalinism
11.4	World War II
11.5	Cold War
11.6	Collapse
11.7	Specialty studies
12	External links
Geography, climate and environment
Soviet Union
State Emblem of the Soviet Union.svg
This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
the Soviet Union
 
Leadership[show]
Communist Party[show]
Legislature[show]
Governance[show]
Judiciary[show]
History and politics[show]
Society[show]
Other countries Atlas
 Soviet Union portal
v t e
Main article: Geography of the Soviet Union
With an area of 22,402,200 square kilometres (8,649,500 sq mi), the Soviet Union was the world's largest country, a status that is retained by the Russian Federation.[10] Covering a sixth of Earth's land surface, its size was comparable to that of North America.[11] The European portion accounted for a quarter of the country's area, and was the cultural and economic center. The eastern part in Asia extended to the Pacific Ocean to the east and Afghanistan to the south, and, except some areas in Central Asia, was much less populous. It spanned over 10,000 kilometres (6,200 mi) east to west across 11 time zones, and over 7,200 kilometres (4,500 mi) north to south. It had five climate zones: tundra, taiga, steppes, desert, and mountains.

The Soviet Union had the world's longest border, like Russia, measuring over 60,000 kilometres (37,000 mi), or 1 1?2 circumferences of Earth. Two-thirds of it was a coastline. Across the Bering Strait was the United States. The Soviet Union bordered Afghanistan, China, Czechoslovakia, Finland, Hungary, Iran, Mongolia, North Korea, Norway, Poland, Romania, and Turkey from 1945 to 1991.

The Soviet Union's highest mountain was Communism Peak (now Ismoil Somoni Peak) in Tajikistan, at 7,495 metres (24,590 ft). The Soviet Union also included most of the world's largest lake, the Caspian Sea (shared with Iran), and Lake Baikal, the world's largest freshwater and deepest lake, an internal body of water in Russia.

History
Main article: History of the Soviet Union
The last Russian Tsar, Nicholas II, ruled the Russian Empire until his abdication in March 1917 in the aftermath of the February Revolution, due in part to the strain of fighting in World War I, which lacked public support. A short-lived Russian Provisional Government took power, to be overthrown in the October Revolution (N.S. 7 November 1917) by revolutionaries led by the Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin.[12]

The Soviet Union was officially established in December 1922 with the union of the Russian, Ukrainian, Byelorussian, and Transcaucasian Soviet republics, each ruled by local Bolshevik parties. Despite the foundation of the Soviet state as a federative entity of many constituent republics, each with its own political and administrative entities, the term "Soviet Russia" C strictly applicable only to the Russian Federative Socialist Republic C was often applied to the entire country by non-Soviet writers and politicians.

Revolution and foundation
Main article: History of Soviet Russia and the Soviet Union (1917C27)
Modern revolutionary activity in the Russian Empire began with the Decembrist revolt of 1825. Although serfdom was abolished in 1861, it was done on terms unfavorable to the peasants and served to encourage revolutionaries. A parliamentthe State Dumawas established in 1906 after the Russian Revolution of 1905, but Tsar Nicholas II resisted attempts to move from absolute to constitutional monarchy. Social unrest continued and was aggravated during World War I by military defeat and food shortages in major Soviet cities.


Vladimir Lenin addressing a crowd with Trotsky, 1920
A spontaneous popular uprising in Petrograd, in response to the wartime decay of Russia's economy and morale, culminated in the February Revolution and the toppling of the imperial government in March 1917. The tsarist autocracy was replaced by the Russian Provisional Government, which intended to conduct elections to the Russian Constituent Assembly and to continue fighting on the side of the Entente in World War I.

At the same time, workers' councils, known in Russian as "Soviets", sprang up across the country. The Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin, pushed for socialist revolution in the Soviets and on the streets. On 7 November 1917, the Red Guards stormed the Winter Palace in Petrograd, ending the rule of the Provisional Government and leaving all political power to the Soviets. This event would later be known as the Great October Socialist Revolution. In December, the Bolsheviks signed an armistice with the Central Powers, though by February 1918, fighting had resumed. In March, the Soviets ended involvement in the war for good and signed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.

A long and bloody Civil War ensued between the Reds and the Whites, starting in 1917 and ending in 1923 with the Reds' victory. It included foreign intervention, the execution of the former tsar and his family, and the famine of 1921, which killed about five million people.[13] In March 1921, during a related conflict with Poland, the Peace of Riga was signed, splitting disputed territories in Belarus and Ukraine between the Republic of Poland and Soviet Russia. Soviet Russia had to resolve similar conflicts with the newly established Republic of Finland, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Latvia, and the Republic of Lithuania.

Unification of republics

The Russian SFSR as a part of the USSR in 1922.

The Russian SFSR as a part of the USSR after 1936 Russian territorial changes.
On 28 December 1922, a conference of plenipotentiary delegations from the Russian SFSR, the Transcaucasian SFSR, the Ukrainian SSR and the Byelorussian SSR approved the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR[14] and the Declaration of the Creation of the USSR, forming the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.[15] These two documents were confirmed by the 1st Congress of Soviets of the USSR and signed by the heads of the delegations,[16] Mikhail Kalinin, Mikhail Tskhakaya, Mikhail Frunze, Grigory Petrovsky, and Alexander Chervyakov,[17] on 30 December 1922. The formal proclamation was made from the stage of the Bolshoi Theatre.

On 1 February 1924, the USSR was recognized by the British Empire. The same year, a Soviet Constitution was approved, legitimizing the December 1922 union.

An intensive restructuring of the economy, industry and politics of the country began in the early days of Soviet power in 1917. A large part of this was done according to the Bolshevik Initial Decrees, government documents signed by Vladimir Lenin. One of the most prominent breakthroughs was the GOELRO plan, which envisioned a major restructuring of the Soviet economy based on total electrification of the country. The plan was developed in 1920 and covered a 10 to 15-year period. It included construction of a network of 30 regional power stations, including ten large hydroelectric power plants, and numerous electric-powered large industrial enterprises.[18] The plan became the prototype for subsequent Five-Year Plans and was fulfilled by 1931.[19]

Stalin era
Main article: History of the Soviet Union (1927C53)


Stalin and Nikolai Yezhov, head of the NKVD. After Yezhov was executed, he was edited out of the image.
From its creation, the government in the Soviet Union was based on the one-party rule of the Communist Party (Bolsheviks).[20] After the economic policy of "War communism" during the Russian Civil War, as a prelude to fully developing socialism in the country, the Soviet government permitted some private enterprise to coexist alongside nationalized industry in the 1920s and total food requisition in the countryside was replaced by a food tax.

The stated purpose of the one-party state was to ensure that capitalist exploitation would not return to the Soviet Union and that the principles of democratic centralism would be most effective in representing the people's will in a practical manner. Debate over the future of the economy provided the background for a power struggle in the years after Lenin's death in 1924. Initially, Lenin was to be replaced by a "troika" consisting of Grigory Zinoviev of the Ukrainian SSR, Lev Kamenev of the Russian SFSR, and Joseph Stalin of the Transcaucasian SFSR.

On 3 April 1922, Stalin was named the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Lenin had appointed Stalin the head of the Workers' and Peasants' Inspectorate, which gave Stalin considerable power. By gradually consolidating his influence and isolating and outmaneuvering his rivals within the party, Stalin became the undisputed leader of the Soviet Union and, by the end of the 1920s, established totalitarian rule. In October 1927, Grigory Zinoviev and Leon Trotsky were expelled from the Central Committee and forced into exile.

In 1928, Stalin introduced the First Five-Year Plan for building a socialist economy. In place of the internationalism expressed by Lenin throughout the Revolution, it aimed to build Socialism in One Country. In industry, the state assumed control over all existing enterprises and undertook an intensive program of industrialization. In agriculture, rather than adhering to the "lead by example" policy advocated by Lenin,[21] forced collectivization of farms was implemented all over the country.

Famines ensued, causing millions of deaths; surviving kulaks were persecuted and many sent to Gulags to do forced labour.[22] Social upheaval continued in the mid-1930s. Stalin's Great Purge resulted in the execution or detainment of many "Old Bolsheviks" who had participated in the October Revolution with Lenin. According to declassified Soviet archives, in 1937 and 1938, the NKVD arrested more than one and a half million people, of whom 681,692 were shot. Over those two years that averages to over one thousand executions a day.[23] According to historian Geoffrey Hosking, "...excess deaths during the 1930s as a whole were in the range of 10C11 million."[24] Yet despite the turmoil of the mid-to-late 1930s, the Soviet Union developed a powerful industrial economy in the years before World War II.

1930s

"Strengthen working discipline in collective farms" C Soviet propaganda poster issued in Uzbekistan, 1933
The early 1930s saw closer cooperation between the West and the USSR. From 1932 to 1934, the Soviet Union participated in the World Disarmament Conference. In 1933, diplomatic relations between the United States and the USSR were established when in November, the newly elected President of the United States, Franklin D. Roosevelt chose to formally recognize Stalin's Communist government and negotiated a new trade agreement between the two nations.[25] In September 1934, the Soviet Union joined the League of Nations. After the Spanish Civil War broke out in 1936, the USSR actively supported the Republican forces against the Nationalists, who were supported by Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany.

In December 1936, Stalin unveiled a new Soviet Constitution. The constitution was seen as a personal triumph for Stalin, who on this occasion was described by Pravda as a "genius of the new world, the wisest man of the epoch, the great leader of communism."[citation needed] By contrast, Western historians and historians from former Soviet occupied countries have viewed the constitution as a meaningless propaganda document.[citation needed]


Draft Constitution of the Soviet Union (1937)
The late 1930s saw a shift towards the Axis powers. In 1939, almost a year after the United Kingdom and France had concluded the Munich Agreement with Germany, the USSR dealt with the Nazis as well, both militarily and economically during extensive talks. The two countries concluded the GermanCSoviet Nonaggression Pact and the GermanCSoviet Commercial Agreement in August 1939. The nonaggression pact made possible Soviet occupation of Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Bessarabia, northern Bukovina, and eastern Poland. In late November of the same year, unable to coerce the Republic of Finland by diplomatic means into moving its border 25 kilometres (16 mi) back from Leningrad, Joseph Stalin ordered the invasion of Finland.

In the east, the Soviet military won several decisive victories during border clashes with the Empire of Japan in 1938 and 1939. However, in April 1941, USSR signed the SovietCJapanese Neutrality Pact with the Empire of Japan, recognizing the territorial integrity of Manchukuo, a Japanese puppet state.

World War II
Main article: Eastern Front (World War II)

Soviet soldiers in Berlin, May 1945
Although it has been debated whether the Soviet Union intended to invade Germany once it was strong enough,[26] Germany itself broke the treaty and invaded the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, starting what was known in the USSR as the "Great Patriotic War". The Red Army stopped the seemingly invincible German Army at the Battle of Moscow, aided by an unusually harsh winter. The Battle of Stalingrad, which lasted from late 1942 to early 1943, dealt a severe blow to the Germans from which they never fully recovered and became a turning point in the war. After Stalingrad, Soviet forces drove through Eastern Europe to Berlin before Germany surrendered in 1945. The German Army suffered 80% of its military deaths in the Eastern Front.[27]


Left to right: Soviet Premier Joseph Stalin, U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill confer in Tehran in 1943.
The same year, the USSR, in fulfillment of its agreement with the Allies at the Yalta Conference, denounced the SovietCJapanese Neutrality Pact in April 1945[28] and invaded Manchukuo and other Japan-controlled territories on 9 August 1945.[29] This conflict ended with a decisive Soviet victory, contributing to the unconditional surrender of Japan and the end of World War II.

The Soviet Union suffered greatly in the war, losing around 27 million people.[30] During the war, the Soviet Union together with the United States, the United Kingdom and China were considered as the Big Four of Allied powers in World War II [31] and later became the Four Policemen which was the foundation of the United Nations Security Council.[32] It emerged as a superpower in the post-war period. Once denied diplomatic recognition by the Western world, the Soviet Union had official relations with practically every nation by the late 1940s. A member of the United Nations at its foundation in 1945, the Soviet Union became one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, which gave it the right to veto any of its resolutions.

The Soviet Union maintained its status as one of the world's two superpowers for four decades through its hegemony in Eastern Europe, military strength, economic strength, aid to developing countries, and scientific research, especially in space technology and weaponry.

Cold War
Main article: Cold War
During the immediate postwar period, the Soviet Union rebuilt and expanded its economy, while maintaining its strictly centralized control. It aided post-war reconstruction in the countries of Eastern Europe, while turning them into satellite states, binding them in a military alliance (the Warsaw Pact) in 1955, and an economic organization (The Council for Mutual Economic Assistance or Comecon) from 1949 to 1991, the latter a counterpart to the European Economic Community.[33] Later, the Comecon supplied aid to the eventually victorious Communist Party of China, and saw its influence grow elsewhere in the world. Fearing its ambitions, the Soviet Union's wartime allies, the United Kingdom and the United States, became its enemies. In the ensuing Cold War, the two sides clashed indirectly using mostly proxies.

Khrushchev era
Main article: History of the Soviet Union (1953C64)

Globe showing the greatest territorial extent of the Soviet Union and states that were dominated politically, economically and/or militarily by it, which was in 1960. This was during the period of time just after the Cuban Revolution of 1959 and just before the official Sino-Soviet split of 1961.
Stalin died on 5 March 1953. Without a mutually agreeable successor, the highest Communist Party officials initially opted to rule the Soviet Union jointly through a troika. This did not last, however, and Nikita Khrushchev eventually won the power struggle by the mid-1950s. He shortly aftwerward denounced Stalin's use of repression in 1956 and proceeded to ease Stalin's repressive controls over party and society. This was known as de-Stalinization.


Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev
Because Moscow considered Eastern Europe to be a critically vital buffer zone for the forward defense of its western borders (in case of another major invasion such as the German invasion of 1940), the USSR sought to cement its control of the region by transforming the Eastern European countries into satellite states dependent upon and subservient to its leadership. Soviet military force was used to suppress anti-Stalinist uprisings in Hungary and Poland in 1956.

In the late 1950s, a confrontation with China regarding the USSR's rapprochement with the West and what Mao Zedong perceived as Khrushchev's revisionism led to the SinoCSoviet split. This resulted in a break throughout the global MarxistCLeninist movement, with the governments in Albania, Cambodia and Somalia choosing to ally with China in place of the USSR.

During this period of the late 1950s and early 1960s, the Soviet Union continued to realize scientific and technological exploits in the Space Race, rivaling the United States: launching the first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1 in 1957; a living dog named Laika in 1957; the first human being, Yuri Gagarin in 1961; the first woman in space, Valentina Tereshkova in 1963; Alexey Leonov, the first person to walk in space in 1965; the first soft landing on the moon by spacecraft Luna 9 in 1966 and the first moon rovers, Lunokhod 1 and Lunokhod 2.[34]


Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, first human to travel into space
Khrushchev initiated "The Thaw", a complex shift in political, cultural and economic life in the Soviet Union. This included some openness and contact with other nations and new social and economic policies with more emphasis on commodity goods, allowing living standards to rise dramatically while maintaining high levels of economic growth. Censorship was relaxed as well.

Khrushchev's reforms in agriculture and administration, however, were generally unproductive. In 1962, he precipitated a crisis with the United States over the Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba. An agreement was made between the Soviet Union and the United States to remove enemy nuclear missiles from both Cuba and Turkey, concluding the crisis. This event caused Khrushchev much embarrassment and loss of prestige, resulting in his removal from power in 1964.

Brezhnev era
Main articles: History of the Soviet Union (1964C82) and Era of Stagnation
Following the ousting of Khrushchev, another period of collective leadership ensued, consisting of Leonid Brezhnev as General Secretary, Alexei Kosygin as Premier and Nikolai Podgorny as Chairman of the Presidium, lasting until Brezhnev established himself in the early 1970s as the preeminent Soviet leader.

In 1968, the Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact allies invaded Czechoslovakia to halt the Prague Spring reforms. In the aftermath, Brezhnev justified the invasion along with the earlier invasions of Eastern European states by introducing the Brezhnev Doctrine, which claimed the right of the Soviet Union to violate the sovereignty of any country that attempted to replace MarxismCLeninism with capitalism.


Soviet General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev and US President Jimmy Carter sign the SALT II arms limitation treaty in Vienna on 18 June 1979.
Brezhnev presided over a period of dtente with the West that resulted in treaties on armament control (SALT I, SALT II, Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty) while at the same time building up Soviet military might.

In October 1977, the third Soviet Constitution was unanimously adopted. The prevailing mood of the Soviet leadership at the time of Brezhnev's death in 1982 was one of aversion to change. The long period of Brezhnev's rule had come to be dubbed one of "standstill", with an aging and ossified top political leadership.

Gorbachev era
Main articles: Cold War (1985C91), History of the Soviet Union (1982C91), and 1991 Soviet coup d'tat attempt

Mikhail Gorbachev in one-to-one discussions with U.S. President Ronald Reagan
Two developments dominated the decade that followed: the increasingly apparent crumbling of the Soviet Union's economic and political structures, and the patchwork attempts at reforms to reverse that process. Kenneth S. Deffeyes argued in Beyond Oil that the Reagan administration encouraged Saudi Arabia to lower the price of oil to the point where the Soviets could not make a profit selling their oil, so that the USSR's hard currency reserves became depleted.[35]

Brezhnev's next two successors, transitional figures with deep roots in his tradition, did not last long. Yuri Andropov was 68 years old and Konstantin Chernenko 72 when they assumed power; both died in less than two years. In an attempt to avoid a third short-lived leader, in 1985, the Soviets turned to the next generation and selected Mikhail Gorbachev.

Gorbachev made significant changes in the economy and party leadership, called perestroika. His policy of glasnost freed public access to information after decades of heavy government censorship.

Gorbachev also moved to end the Cold War. In 1988, the Soviet Union abandoned its nine-year war in Afghanistan and began to withdraw its forces. In the late 1980s, he refused military support to the Soviet Union's former satellite states[clarify], which paved the way for Revolutions of 1989. With the tearing down of the Berlin Wall and with East Germany and West Germany pursuing unification, the Iron Curtain came down.

In the late 1980s, the constituent republics of the Soviet Union started legal moves towards potentially declaring sovereignty over their territories, citing Article 72 of the USSR constitution, which stated that any constituent republic was free to secede.[36] On 7 April 1990, a law was passed allowing a republic to secede if more than two-thirds of its residents voted for it in a referendum.[37] Many held their first free elections in the Soviet era for their own national legislatures in 1990. Many of these legislatures proceeded to produce legislation contradicting the Union laws in what was known as the "War of Laws".

In 1989, the Russian SFSR, which was then the largest constituent republic (with about half of the population) convened a newly elected Congress of People's Deputies. Boris Yeltsin was elected its chairman. On 12 June 1990, the Congress declared Russia's sovereignty over its territory and proceeded to pass laws that attempted to supersede some of the USSR's laws. After a landslide victory of S?jdis in Lithuania, that country declared its independence restored on 11 March 1990.

A referendum for the preservation of the USSR was held on 17 March 1991 in nine republics (the remainder having boycotted the vote), with the majority of the population in those nine republics voting for preservation of the Union. The referendum gave Gorbachev a minor boost. In the summer of 1991, the New Union Treaty, which would have turned the Soviet Union into a much looser Union, was agreed upon by eight republics.


Boris Yeltsin stands on a tank in Moscow to defy the August Coup, 1991
The signing of the treaty, however, was interrupted by the August Coupan attempted coup d'tat by hardline members of the government and the KGB who sought to reverse Gorbachev's reforms and reassert the central government's control over the republics. After the coup collapsed, Yeltsin was seen as a hero for his decisive actions, while Gorbachev's power was effectively ended. The balance of power tipped significantly towards the republics. In August 1991, Latvia and Estonia immediately declared the restoration of their full independence (following Lithuania's 1990 example). Gorbachev resigned as general secretary in late August, and soon afterward the Party's activities were indefinitely suspendedeffectively ending its rule. By the fall, Gorbachev could no longer influence events outside of Moscow, and he was being challenged even there by Yeltsin, who had been elected President of Russia in July 1991.

Dissolution
Main articles: Dissolution of the Soviet Union and Commonwealth of Independent States
The remaining 12 republics continued discussing new, increasingly looser, models of the Union. However, by December, all except Russia and Kazakhstan had formally declared independence. During this time, Yeltsin took over what remained of the Soviet government, including the Moscow Kremlin. The final blow was struck on 1 December, when Ukraine, the second most powerful republic, voted overwhelmingly for independence. Ukraine's secession ended any realistic chance of the Soviet Union staying together even on a limited scale.


Changes in national boundaries after the end of the Cold War
On 8 December 1991, the presidents of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus (formerly Byelorussia), signed the Belavezha Accords, which declared the Soviet Union dissolved and established the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) in its place. While doubts remained over the authority of the accords to do this, on 21 December 1991, the representatives of all Soviet republics except Georgia signed the Alma-Ata Protocol, which confirmed the accords. On 25 December 1991, Gorbachev resigned as the President of the USSR, declaring the office extinct. He turned the powers that had been vested in the presidency over to Yeltsin. That night, the Soviet flag was lowered for the last time, and the Russian tricolor was raised in its place.

The following day, the Supreme Soviet, the highest governmental body of the Soviet Union, voted both itself and the Soviet Union out of existence. This is generally recognized as marking the official, final dissolution of the Soviet Union as a functioning state. The Soviet Army originally remained under overall CIS command, but was soon absorbed into the different military forces of the newly independent states. The few remaining Soviet institutions that had not been taken over by Russia ceased to function by the end of 1991.

Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union on 26 December 1991, Russia was internationally recognized[38] as its legal successor on the international stage. To that end, Russia voluntarily accepted all Soviet foreign debt and claimed overseas Soviet properties as its own. Under the 1992 Lisbon Protocol, Russia also agreed to receive all nuclear weapons remaining in the territory of other former Soviet republics. Since then, the Russian Federation has assumed the Soviet Union's rights and obligations. Ukraine has refused to recognize exclusive Russian claims to succession of the USSR and claimed such status for Ukraine as well, which was codified in Articles 7 and 8 of its 1991 law On Legal Succession of Ukraine. Since its independence in 1991 Ukraine has continued to pursue claims against Russia in foreign courts, seeking to recover its share of the foreign property that was owned by the Soviet Union.


Internally displaced Azerbaijanis from Nagorno-Karabakh, 1993
The dissolution of the Soviet Union was followed by a severe economic contraction and catastrophic fall in living standards in post-Soviet states[39] including a rapid increase in poverty,[40][41][42] crime,[43][44] corruption,[45][46] unemployment,[47] homelessness,[48][49] rates of disease,[50][51][52] and income inequality,[53] along with decreases in calorie intake, life expectancy, adult literacy, and income.[54] The economic shocks that accompanied wholesale privatization were associated with sharp increases in mortality. Data shows Russia, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia saw a tripling of unemployment and a 42% increase in male death rates between 1991 and 1994.[55][56]

Post-Soviet states
Main article: Post-Soviet states
The analysis of the succession of states with respect to the 15 post-Soviet states is complex. The Russian Federation is seen as the legal continuator state and is for most purposes the heir to the Soviet Union. It retained ownership of all former Soviet embassy properties, as well as the old Soviet UN membership and permanent membership on the Security Council.[57] The Baltic states are not successor states to the Soviet Union;[58] they are instead considered to have de jure continuity with their pre-World War II governments through the non-recognition of the original Soviet incorporation in 1940.[57] The other 11 post-Soviet states are considered newly-independent successor states to the Soviet Union.[57]

There are additionally four states that claim independence from the other internationally recognized post-Soviet states, but possess limited international recognition: Abkhazia, Nagorno-Karabakh, South Ossetia, and Transnistria. The Chechen separatist movement of the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria lacks any international recognition.

Politics
Main articles: Politics of the Soviet Union and Ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
Part of a series on
MarxismCLeninism
Marx, Engels and Lenin, the founders of Marxism-Leninism.
Core tenets[show]
Variants[show]
People[show]
Literature[show]
History[show]
Related topics[show]
Communism portal
Socialism portal
Politics portal
v t e
There were three power hierarchies in the Soviet Union: the legislature represented by the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union, the government represented by the Council of Ministers, and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), the only legal party and the ultimate policymaker in the country.[59]

Communist Party
Main article: Communist Party of the Soviet Union
At the top of the Communist Party was the Central Committee, elected at Party Congresses and Conferences. The Central Committee in turn voted for a Politburo (called the Presidium between 1952C1966), Secretariat and the General Secretary (First Secretary from 1953 to 1966), the de facto highest office in the USSR.[60] Depending on the degree of power consolidation, it was either the Politburo as a collective body or the General Secretary, who always was one of the Politburo members, that effectively led the party and the country[61] (except for the period of the highly personalized authority of Stalin, exercised directly through his position in the Council of Ministers rather than the Politburo after 1941).[62] They were not controlled by the general party membership, as the key principle of the party organization was democratic centralism, demanding strict subordination to higher bodies, and elections went uncontested, endorsing the candidates proposed from above.[63]

The Communist Party maintained its dominance over the state largely through its control over the system of appointments. All senior government officials and most deputies of the Supreme Soviet were members of the CPSU. Of the party heads themselves, Stalin in 1941C1953 and Khrushchev in 1958C1964 were Premiers. Upon the forced retirement of Khrushchev, the party leader was prohibited from this kind of double membership,[64] but the later General Secretaries for at least some part of their tenure occupied the largely ceremonial position of Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, the nominal head of state. The institutions at lower levels were overseen and at times supplanted by primary party organizations.[65]

In practice, however, the degree of control the party was able to exercise over the state bureaucracy, particularly after the death of Stalin, was far from total, with the bureaucracy pursuing different interests that were at times in conflict with the party.[66] Nor was the party itself monolithic from top to bottom, although factions were officially banned.[67]

Government
Main article: Government of the Soviet Union

The Grand Kremlin Palace, seat of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union, 1982
The Supreme Soviet (successor of the Congress of Soviets and Central Executive Committee) was nominally the highest state body for most of the Soviet history,[68] at first acting as a rubber stamp institution, approving and implementing all decisions made by the party. However, the powers and functions of the Supreme Soviet were extended in the late 1950s, 1960s and 1970s, including the creation of new state commissions and committees. It gained additional powers relating to the approval of the Five-Year Plans and the Soviet government budget.[69] The Supreme Soviet elected a Presidium to wield its power between plenary sessions,[70] ordinarily held twice a year, and appointed the Supreme Court,[71] the Procurator General[72] and the Council of Ministers (known before 1946 as the Council of People's Commissars), headed by the Chairman (Premier) and managing an enormous bureaucracy responsible for the administration of the economy and society.[70] State and party structures of the constituent republics largely emulated the structure of the central institutions, although the Russian SFSR, unlike the other constituent republics, for most of its history had no republican branch of the CPSU, being ruled directly by the union-wide party until 1990. Local authorities were organized likewise into party committees, local Soviets and executive committees. While the state system was nominally federal, the party was unitary.[73]

The state security police (the KGB and its predecessor agencies) played an important role in Soviet politics. It was instrumental in the Stalinist terror,[74] but after the death of Stalin, the state security police was brought under strict party control. Under Yuri Andropov, KGB chairman in 1967C1982 and General Secretary from 1982 to 1983, the KGB engaged in the suppression of political dissent and maintained an extensive network of informers, reasserting itself as a political actor to some extent independent of the party-state structure,[75] culminating in the anti-corruption campaign targeting high party officials in the late 1970s and early 1980s.[76]

Separation of power and reform
Main article: Perestroika

Nationalist anti-government riots in Dushanbe, Tajikistan, 1990
The Union constitutions, which were promulgated in 1918, 1924, 1936 and 1977,[77] did not limit state power. No formal separation of powers existed between the Party, Supreme Soviet and Council of Ministers[78] that represented executive and legislative branches of the government. The system was governed less by statute than by informal conventions, and no settled mechanism of leadership succession existed. Bitter and at times deadly power struggles took place in the Politburo after the deaths of Lenin[79] and Joseph Stalin,[80] as well as after Khrushchev's dismissal,[81] itself due to a decision by both the Politburo and the Central Committee.[82] All leaders of the Communist Party before Gorbachev died in office, except Georgy Malenkov[83] and Khrushchev, both dismissed from the party leadership amid internal struggle within the party.[82]

Between 1988 and 1990, facing considerable opposition, Mikhail Gorbachev enacted reforms shifting power away from the highest bodies of the party and making the Supreme Soviet less dependent on them. The Congress of People's Deputies was established, the majority of whose members were directly elected in competitive elections held in March 1989. The Congress now elected the Supreme Soviet, which became a full-time parliament, much stronger than before. For the first time since the 1920s, it refused to rubber stamp proposals from the party and Council of Ministers.[84] In 1990, Gorbachev introduced and assumed the position of the President of the Soviet Union, concentrated power in his executive office, independent of the party, and subordinated the government,[85] now renamed the Cabinet of Ministers of the USSR, to himself.[86]

Tensions grew between the union-wide authorities under Gorbachev, reformists led in Russia by Boris Yeltsin and controlling the newly elected Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR, and Communist Party hardliners. On 19C21 August 1991, a group of hardliners staged an abortive coup attempt. Following the failed coup, the State Council of the Soviet Union became the highest organ of state power "in the period of transition".[87] Gorbachev resigned as General Secretary, only remaining President for the final months of the existence of the USSR.[88]

Judicial system
Main article: Law of the Soviet Union
See also: Socialist law
The judiciary was not independent of the other branches of government. The Supreme Court supervised the lower courts (People's Court) and applied the law as established by the Constitution or as interpreted by the Supreme Soviet. The Constitutional Oversight Committee reviewed the constitutionality of laws and acts. The Soviet Union used the inquisitorial system of Roman law, where the judge, procurator, and defense attorney collaborate to establish the truth.[89]

Administrative divisions
Main articles: Soviet republic (system of government) and Republics of the Soviet Union
Constitutionally, the USSR was a federation of constituent Union Republics, which were either unitary states, such as Ukraine or Belarus (SSRs), or federal states, such as Russia or Transcaucasia (SFSRs),[59] all four being the founding republics who signed the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR in December 1922. In 1924, during the national delimitation in Central Asia, the Uzbek and Turkmen SSRs were formed from parts of the Russia's Turkestan ASSR and two Soviet dependencies, the Khorezm and Bukharan SSRs. In 1929, the Tajik SSR was split off from the Uzbek SSR. With the constitution of 1936, the Transcaucasian SFSR was dissolved, resulting in its constituent Armenian, Georgian and Azerbaijan SSRs being elevated to Union Republics, while the Kazakh and Kirghiz SSRs were split off from Russian SFSR, resulting in the same status.[90] In August 1940, the Moldavian SSR was formed from parts of the Ukrainian SSR and Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina. The Estonian, Latvian and Lithuanian SSRs were also admitted into the union. The Karelo-Finnish SSR was split off from Russia as a Union Republic in March 1940 and was reabsorbed in 1956. Between July 1956 and September 1991, there were 15 union republics (see map below).[91]

#	Republic	Map of the Union Republics between 1956C1991
1	 Russian SFSR	Republics of the USSR.svg
2	 Ukrainian SSR
3	 Byelorussian SSR
4	 Uzbek SSR
5	 Kazakh SSR
6	 Georgian SSR
7	 Azerbaijan SSR
8	 Lithuanian SSR
9	 Moldavian SSR
10	 Latvian SSR
11	 Kirghiz SSR
12	 Tajik SSR
13	 Armenian SSR
14	 Turkmen SSR
15	 Estonian SSR
Economy
Main article: Economy of the Soviet Union

The DneproGES, one of many hydroelectric power stations in the Soviet Union

The Soviet Union in comparison to other countries by GDP (nominal) per capita in 1965 based on a West-German school book (1971).
  > 5,000 DM
  2,500 C 5,000 DM
  1,000 C 2,500 DM
  500 C 1,000 DM
  250 C 500 DM
  < 250 DM
The Soviet Union became the first country to adopt a planned economy, whereby production and distribution of goods were centralized and directed by the government. The first Bolshevik experience with a command economy was the policy of War communism, which involved the nationalization of industry, centralized distribution of output, coercive requisition of agricultural production, and attempts to eliminate the circulation of money, as well as private enterprises and free trade. After the severe economic collapse caused by the war, Lenin replaced War Communism with the New Economic Policy (NEP) in 1921, legalising free trade and private ownership of smaller businesses. The economy quickly recovered.[92]

Following a lengthy debate among the members of Politburo over the course of economic development, by 1928C1929, upon gaining control of the country, Joseph Stalin abandoned the NEP and pushed for full central planning, starting forced collectivization of agriculture and enacting draconian labor legislation. Resources were mobilized for rapid industrialization, which greatly expanded Soviet capacity in heavy industry and capital goods during the 1930s.[92] Preparation for war was one of the main driving forces behind industrialization, mostly due to distrust of the outside capitalistic world.[93] As a result, the USSR was transformed from a largely agrarian economy into a great industrial power, leading the way for its emergence as a superpower after World War II.[94] During the war, the Soviet economy and infrastructure suffered massive devastation and required extensive reconstruction.[95]


Picking cotton in Armenia in the 1930s
By the early 1940s, the Soviet economy had become relatively self-sufficient; for most of the period until the creation of Comecon, only a very small share of domestic products was traded internationally.[96] After the creation of the Eastern Bloc, external trade rose rapidly. Still the influence of the world economy on the USSR was limited by fixed domestic prices and a state monopoly on foreign trade.[97] Grain and sophisticated consumer manufactures became major import articles from around the 1960s.[96] During the arms race of the Cold War, the Soviet economy was burdened by military expenditures, heavily lobbied for by a powerful bureaucracy dependent on the arms industry. At the same time, the Soviet Union became the largest arms exporter to the Third World. Significant amounts of Soviet resources during the Cold War were allocated in aid to the other socialist states.[96]

From the 1930s until its collapse in late 1991, the way the Soviet economy operated remained essentially unchanged. The economy was formally directed by central planning, carried out by Gosplan and organized in five-year plans. In practice, however, the plans were highly aggregated and provisional, subject to ad hoc intervention by superiors. All key economic decisions were taken by the political leadership. Allocated resources and plan targets were normally denominated in rubles rather than in physical goods. Credit was discouraged, but widespread. Final allocation of output was achieved through relatively decentralized, unplanned contracting. Although in theory prices were legally set from above, in practice the actual prices were often negotiated, and informal horizontal links (between producer factories etc.) were widespread.[92]

A number of basic services were state-funded, such as education and healthcare. In the manufacturing sector, heavy industry and defense were assigned higher priority than the production of consumer goods.[98] Consumer goods, particularly outside large cities, were often scarce, of poor quality and limited choice. Under command economy, consumers had almost no influence over production, so the changing demands of a population with growing incomes could not be satisfied by supplies at rigidly fixed prices.[99] A massive unplanned second economy grew up alongside the planned one at low levels, providing some of the goods and services that the planners could not. Legalization of some elements of the decentralized economy was attempted with the reform of 1965.[92]


Workers of the Salihorsk potash plant, Belarus, 1968
Although statistics of the Soviet economy are notoriously unreliable and its economic growth difficult to estimate precisely,[100][101] by most accounts, the economy continued to expand until the mid-1980s. During the 1950s and 1960s, the Soviet economy experienced comparatively high growth and was catching up to the West.[102] However, after 1970, the growth, while still positive, steadily declined much more quickly and consistently than in other countries despite a rapid increase in the capital stock (the rate of increase in capital was only surpassed by Japan).[92]

Overall, between 1960 and 1989, the growth rate of per capita income in the Soviet Union was slightly above the world average (based on 102 countries).[citation needed] According to Stanley Fischer and William Easterly, growth could have been faster. By their calculation, per capita income of Soviet Union in 1989 should have been twice as high as it was considering the amount of investment, education and population. The authors attribute this poor performance to low productivity of capital in the Soviet Union.[103] Steven Rosenfielde states that the standard of living actually declined as a result of Stalin's despotism, and while there was a brief improvement following his death, lapsed into stagnation.[104]

In 1987, Mikhail Gorbachev tried to reform and revitalize the economy with his program of perestroika. His policies relaxed state control over enterprises, but did not yet allow it to be replaced by market incentives, ultimately resulting in a sharp decline in production output. The economy, already suffering from reduced petroleum export revenues, started to collapse. Prices were still fixed, and property was still largely state-owned until after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.[92][99] For most of the period after World War II up to its collapse, the Soviet economy was the second largest in the world by GDP (PPP), and was 3rd in the world during the middle of the 1980s to 1989,[105] though in per capita terms the Soviet GDP was behind that of the First World countries.[106]

Energy
Main article: Energy policy of the Soviet Union

Soviet stamp depicting the 30th anniversary of the International Atomic Energy Agency, published in 1987, a year following the Chernobyl nuclear disaster
The need for fuel declined in the Soviet Union from the 1970s to the 1980s,[107] both per ruble of gross social product and per ruble of industrial product. At the start, this decline grew very rapidly but gradually slowed down between 1970 and 1975. From 1975 and 1980, it grew even slower,[clarification needed] only 2.6 percent.[108] David Wilson, a historian, believed that the gas industry would account for 40 percent of Soviet fuel production by the end of the century. His theory did not come to fruition because of the USSR's collapse.[109] The USSR, in theory, would have continued to have an economic growth rate of 2C2.5 percent during the 1990s because of Soviet energy fields.[clarification needed][110] However, the energy sector faced many difficulties, among them the country's high military expenditure and hostile relations with the First World (pre-Gorbachev era).[111]

In 1991, the Soviet Union had a pipeline network of 82,000 kilometres (51,000 mi) for crude oil and another 206,500 kilometres (128,300 mi) for natural gas.[112] Petroleum and petroleum-based products, natural gas, metals, wood, agricultural products, and a variety of manufactured goods, primarily machinery, arms and military equipment, were exported.[113] In the 1970s and 1980s, the Soviet Union heavily relied on fossil fuel exports to earn hard currency.[96] At its peak in 1988, it was the largest producer and second largest exporter of crude oil, surpassed only by Saudi Arabia.[114]

Science and technology
Main article: Science and technology in the Soviet Union

Soviet stamp showing the orbit of Sputnik 1
The Soviet Union placed great emphasis on science and technology within its economy,[115] however, the most remarkable Soviet successes in technology, such as producing the world's first space satellite, typically were the responsibility of the military.[98] Lenin believed that the USSR would never overtake the developed world if it remained as technologically backward as it was upon its founding. Soviet authorities proved their commitment to Lenin's belief by developing massive networks, research and development organizations. In the early 1960s, the Soviets awarded 40% of chemistry PhDs to women, compared to only 5% who received such a degree in the United States.[116] By 1989, Soviet scientists were among the world's best-trained specialists in several areas, such as energy physics, selected areas of medicine, mathematics, welding and military technologies. Due to rigid state planning and bureaucracy, the Soviets remained far behind technologically in chemistry, biology, and computers when compared to the First World.

Project Socrates, under the Reagan administration, determined that the Soviet Union addressed the acquisition of science and technology in a manner that was radically different from what the US was using. In the case of the US, economic prioritization was being used for indigenous research and development as the means to acquire science and technology in both the private and public sectors. In contrast, the Soviet Union was offensively and defensively maneuvering in the acquisition and utilization of the worldwide technology, to increase the competitive advantage that they acquired from the technology, while preventing the US from acquiring a competitive advantage. However, in addition, the Soviet Union's technology-based planning was executed in a centralized, government-centric manner that greatly hindered its flexibility. It was this significant lack of flexibility that was exploited by the US to undermine the strength of the Soviet Union and thus foster its reform.[117][118][119]

Transport
Main article: Transport in the Soviet Union

Aeroflot's flag during the Soviet era
Transport was a key component of the nation's economy. The economic centralization of the late 1920s and 1930s led to the development of infrastructure on a massive scale, most notably the establishment of Aeroflot, an aviation enterprise.[120] The country had a wide variety of modes of transport by land, water and air.[112] However, due to bad maintenance, much of the road, water and Soviet civil aviation transport were outdated and technologically backward compared to the First World.[121]

Soviet rail transport was the largest and most intensively used in the world;[121] it was also better developed than most of its Western counterparts.[122] By the late 1970s and early 1980s, Soviet economists were calling for the construction of more roads to alleviate some of the burden from the railways and to improve the Soviet government budget.[123] The street network and automotive industry[124] remained underdeveloped,[125] and dirt roads were common outside major cities.[126] Soviet maintenance projects proved unable to take care of even the few roads the country had. By the early-to-mid-1980s, the Soviet authorities tried to solve the road problem by ordering the construction of new ones.[126] Meanwhile, the automobile industry was growing at a faster rate than road construction.[127] The underdeveloped road network led to a growing demand for public transport.[128]

Despite improvements, several aspects of the transport sector were still[when?] riddled with problems due to outdated infrastructure, lack of investment, corruption and bad decision-making. Soviet authorities were unable to meet the growing demand for transport infrastructure and services.

The Soviet merchant navy was one of the largest in the world.[112]

Demographics
Main article: Demographics of the Soviet Union

Population of the USSR (red) and the post-Soviet states (blue) from 1961 to 2009. And projection (dotted blue) 2010 to 2100.
Excess deaths over the course of World War I and the Russian Civil War (including the postwar famine) amounted to a combined total of 18 million,[129] some 10 million in the 1930s,[24] and more than 26 million in 1941C5. The postwar Soviet population was 45 to 50 million smaller than it would have been if pre-war demographic growth had continued.[30] According to Catherine Merridale, "... reasonable estimate would place the total number of excess deaths for the whole period somewhere around 60 million."[130]

The birth rate of the USSR decreased from 44.0 per thousand in 1926 to 18.0 in 1974, largely due to increasing urbanization and the rising average age of marriages. The mortality rate demonstrated a gradual decrease as well C from 23.7 per thousand in 1926 to 8.7 in 1974. In general, the birth rates of the southern republics in Transcaucasia and Central Asia were considerably higher than those in the northern parts of the Soviet Union, and in some cases even increased in the postCWorld War II period, a phenomenon partly attributed to slower rates of urbanization and traditionally earlier marriages in the southern republics.[131] Soviet Europe moved towards sub-replacement fertility, while Soviet Central Asia continued to exhibit population growth well above replacement-level fertility.[132]

The late 1960s and the 1970s witnessed a reversal of the declining trajectory of the rate of mortality in the USSR, and was especially notable among men of working age, but was also prevalent in Russia and other predominantly Slavic areas of the country.[133] An analysis of the official data from the late 1980s showed that after worsening in the late-1970s and the early 1980s, adult mortality began to improve again.[134] The infant mortality rate increased from 24.7 in 1970 to 27.9 in 1974. Some researchers regarded the rise as largely real, a consequence of worsening health conditions and services.[135] The rises in both adult and infant mortality were not explained or defended by Soviet officials, and the Soviet government simply stopped publishing all mortality statistics for ten years. Soviet demographers and health specialists remained silent about the mortality increases until the late-1980s, when the publication of mortality data resumed and researchers could delve into the real causes.[136]

Education
Main article: Education in the Soviet Union

Soviet pupils in Milovice, Czechoslovakia (now Czech Republic), 1985
Before 1917, education was not free in the Russian Empire and was therefore either inaccessible or barely accessible for many children from lower-class working and peasant families. Estimates from 1917 recorded that 75C85 percent of the Russian population was illiterate.

Anatoly Lunacharsky became the first People's Commissar for Education of Soviet Russia. At the beginning, the Soviet authorities placed great emphasis on the elimination of illiteracy. People who were literate were automatically hired as teachers. For a short period, quality was sacrificed for quantity. By 1940, Joseph Stalin could announce that illiteracy had been eliminated. Throughout the 1930s social mobility rose sharply, which has been attributed to Soviet reforms in education.[137] In the aftermath of the Great Patriotic War, the country's educational system expanded dramatically. This expansion had a tremendous effect. In the 1960s, nearly all Soviet children had access to education, the only exception being those living in remote areas. Nikita Khrushchev tried to make education more accessible, making it clear to children that education was closely linked to the needs of society. Education also became important in giving rise to the New Man.[138] Citizens directly entering the work force had the constitutional right to a job and to free vocational training.

The country's system of education was highly centralized and universally accessible to all citizens, with affirmative action for applicants from nations associated with cultural backwardness. However, as part of the general antisemitic policy, an unofficial Jewish quota was applied in the leading institutions of higher education by subjecting Jewish applicants to harsher entrance examinations.[139][140][141][142] The Brezhnev era also introduced a rule that required all university applicants to present a reference from the local Komsomol party secretary.[143] According to statistics from 1986, the number of higher education students per the population of 10,000 was 181 for the USSR, compared to 517 for the U.S.[144]

Ethnic groups
The Soviet Union was a very ethnically diverse country, with more than 100 distinct ethnic groups. The total population was estimated at 293 million in 1991. According to a 1990 estimate, the majority were Russians (50.78%), followed by Ukrainians (15.45%) and Uzbeks (5.84%).[145]

All citizens of the USSR had their own ethnic affiliation. The ethnicity of a person was chosen at the age of sixteen[146] by the child's parents. If the parents did not agree, the child was automatically assigned the ethnicity of the father. Partly due to Soviet policies, some of the smaller minority ethnic groups were considered part of larger ones, such as the Mingrelians of Georgia, who were classified with the linguistically related Georgians.[147] Some ethnic groups voluntarily assimilated, while others were brought in by force. Russians, Belarusians, and Ukrainians shared close cultural ties, while other groups did not. With multiple nationalities living in the same territory, ethnic antagonisms developed over the years.[148][neutrality is disputed]


Ethnographic map of the Soviet Union, 1941
 

Number and share of Ukrainians in the population of the regions of the RSFSR (1926 census)
 

Map showing the distribution of Muslims within the Soviet Union in 1979
 

Number and share of Ukrainians in the population of the regions of the RSFSR (1979 census)
Health
Main article: Health care in the Soviet Union

An early Soviet-era poster discouraging unsafe abortion practices
In 1917, before the revolution, health conditions were significantly behind those of developed countries. As Lenin later noted, "Either the lice will defeat socialism, or socialism will defeat the lice".[149] The Soviet principle of health care was conceived by the People's Commissariat for Health in 1918. Health care was to be controlled by the state and would be provided to its citizens free of charge, this at the time being a revolutionary concept. Article 42 of the 1977 Soviet Constitution gave all citizens the right to health protection and free access to any health institutions in the USSR. Before Leonid Brezhnev became General Secretary, the healthcare system of the Soviet Union was held in high esteem by many foreign specialists. This changed however, from Brezhnev's accession and Mikhail Gorbachev's tenure as leader, the Soviet health care system was heavily criticized for many basic faults, such as the quality of service and the unevenness in its provision.[150] Minister of Health Yevgeniy Chazov, during the 19th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, while highlighting such Soviet successes as having the most doctors and hospitals in the world, recognized the system's areas for improvement and felt that billions of Soviet rubles were squandered.[151]

After the socialist revolution, the life expectancy for all age groups went up. This statistic in itself was seen by some that the socialist system was superior to the capitalist system. These improvements continued into the 1960s, when the life expectancy in the Soviet Union surpassed that of the United States. It remained stable during most years, although in the 1970s, it went down slightly, possibly because of alcohol abuse. At the same time, infant mortality began to rise. After 1974, the government stopped publishing statistics on this. This trend can be partly explained by the number of pregnancies rising drastically in the Asian part of the country where infant mortality was highest, while declining markedly in the more developed European part of the Soviet Union.[152] The USSR had several centers of excellence, such as the Fyodorov Eye Microsurgery Complex, founded in 1988 by Russian eye surgeon Svyatoslav Fyodorov.

Language
Main article: Languages of the Soviet Union
The Soviet government headed by Vladimir Lenin gave small language groups their own writing systems.[153] The development of these writing systems was very successful, even though some flaws were detected. During the later days of the USSR, countries with the same multilingual situation implemented similar policies. A serious problem when creating these writing systems was that the languages differed dialectally greatly from each other.[154] When a language had been given a writing system and appeared in a notable publication, that language would attain "official language" status. There were many minority languages which never received their own writing system; therefore their speakers were forced to have a second language.[155] There are examples where the Soviet government retreated from this policy, most notable under Stalin's regime, where education was discontinued in languages which were not widespread enough. These languages were then assimilated into another language, mostly Russian.[156] During the Great Patriotic War, some minority languages were banned, and their speakers accused of collaborating with the enemy.[157]

As the most widely spoken of the Soviet Union's many languages, Russian de facto functioned as an official language, as the "language of interethnic communication" (Russian:   ), but only assumed the de jure status as the official national language in 1990.[158]

Religion
Main article: Religion in the Soviet Union

The Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, Moscow, during its demolition in 1931
The religious made up a significant minority of the Soviet Union prior to break up. In 1990, the religious makeup was 20% Russian Orthodox, 10% Muslim, 7% Protestant, Armenian Apostolic, Georgian Orthodox, and Roman Catholic, less than 1% Jewish and 60% atheist.[159]

Christianity and Islam had the greatest number of adherents among the Soviet state's religious citizens.[160] Eastern Christianity predominated among Christians, with Russia's traditional Russian Orthodox Church being the Soviet Union's largest Christian denomination. About 90 percent of the Soviet Union's Muslims were Sunnis, with Shias concentrated in Azerbaijan.[160] Smaller groups included Roman Catholics, Jews, Buddhists, and a variety of Protestant sects.[160]

Religious influence had been strong in the Russian Empire. The Russian Orthodox Church enjoyed a privileged status as the church of the monarchy and took part in carrying out official state functions.[161] The immediate period following the establishment of the Soviet state included a struggle against the Orthodox Church, which the revolutionaries considered an ally of the former ruling classes.[162]

In Soviet law, the "freedom to hold religious services" was constitutionally guaranteed, although the ruling Communist Party regarded religion as incompatible with the Marxist spirit of scientific materialism.[162] In practice, the Soviet system subscribed to a narrow interpretation of this right, and in fact utilized a range of official measures to discourage religion and curb the activities of religious groups.[162]

The 1918 Council of People's Commissars decree establishing the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) as a secular state also decreed that "the teaching of religion in all [places] where subjects of general instruction are taught, is forbidden. Citizens may teach and may be taught religion privately."[163] Among further restrictions, those adopted in 1929, a half-decade into Stalin's rule, included express prohibitions on a range of church activities, including meetings for organized Bible study.[162] Both Christian and non-Christian establishments were shut down by the thousands in the 1920s and 1930s. By 1940, as many as 90 percent of the churches, synagogues, and mosques that had been operating in 1917 were closed.[164]

Convinced that religious anti-Sovietism had become a thing of the past with most Soviet Christians, and with the looming threat of war, the Stalin regime began shifting to a more moderate religion policy in the late 1930s.[165] Soviet religious establishments overwhelmingly rallied to support the war effort during the Soviet war with Nazi Germany. Amid other accommodations to religious faith after Hitler attacked the Soviet Union, churches were reopened, Radio Moscow began broadcasting a religious hour, and a historic meeting between Stalin and Orthodox Church leader Patriarch Sergius of Moscow was held in 1943. Stalin had the support of the majority of the religious people in the Soviet Union even through the late 1980s.[165] The general tendency of this period was an increase in religious activity among believers of all faiths.[166]

The Soviet establishment under General Secretary Nikita Khrushchev's leadership clashed with the churches in 1958C1964, a period when atheism was emphasized in the educational curriculum, and numerous state publications promoted atheistic views.[165] During this period, the number of churches fell from 20,000 to 10,000 from 1959 to 1965, and the number of synagogues dropped from 500 to 97.[167] The number of working mosques also declined, falling from 1,500 to 500 within a decade.[167]

Religious institutions remained monitored by the Soviet government, but churches, synagogues, temples, and mosques were all given more leeway in the Brezhnev era.[168] Official relations between the Orthodox Church and the Soviet government again warmed to the point that the Brezhnev government twice honored Orthodox Patriarch Alexy I with the Order of the Red Banner of Labour.[169] A poll conducted by Soviet authorities in 1982 recorded 20 percent of the Soviet population as "active religious believers."[170]

Women
[icon]	This section requires expansion. (March 2015)
Soviet efforts to expand social, political and economic opportunities for women constitute "the earliest and perhaps most far-reaching attempt ever undertaken to transform the status and role of women."[171]

Culture
Main article: Culture of the Soviet Union
See also: Soviet cuisine and Fashion in the Soviet Union
MENU0:00
The Enthusiast's March, a 1930s song famous in the Soviet Union
The culture of the Soviet Union passed through several stages during the USSR's 69-year existence. During the first eleven years following the Revolution (1918C1929), there was relative freedom and artists experimented with several different styles to find a distinctive Soviet style of art. Lenin wanted art to be accessible to the Russian people. On the other hand, hundreds of intellectuals, writers, and artists were exiled or executed, and their work banned, for example Nikolay Gumilyov (shot for alleged conspiring against the Bolshevik regime) and Yevgeny Zamyatin (banned).[172]

The government encouraged a variety of trends. In art and literature, numerous schools, some traditional and others radically experimental, proliferated. Communist writers Maxim Gorky and Vladimir Mayakovsky were active during this time. Film, as a means of influencing a largely illiterate society, received encouragement from the state; much of director Sergei Eisenstein's best work dates from this period.

Later, during Stalin's rule, Soviet culture was characterized by the rise and domination of the government-imposed style of socialist realism, with all other trends being severely repressed, with rare exceptions, for example Mikhail Bulgakov's works. Many writers were imprisoned and killed.[173]

Following the Khrushchev Thaw of the late 1950s and early 1960s, censorship was diminished. During this time, a distinctive period of Soviet culture developed characterized by conformist public life and intense focus on personal life. Greater experimentation in art forms were again permissible, with the result that more sophisticated and subtly critical work began to be produced. The regime loosened its emphasis on socialist realism; thus, for instance, many protagonists of the novels of author Yury Trifonov concerned themselves with problems of daily life rather than with building socialism. An underground dissident literature, known as samizdat, developed during this late period. In architecture the Khrushchev era mostly focused on functional design as opposed to the highly decorated style of Stalin's epoch.

In the second half of the 1980s, Gorbachev's policies of perestroika and glasnost significantly expanded freedom of expression throughout the Soviet Union in the media & press.[174]

See also
	Soviet Union portal
	Communism portal
	Russia portal
Soviet Empire
Neo-Sovietism
Eurasian Economic Union
Commonwealth of Independent States
Collective Security Treaty Organization
Index of Soviet Union-related articles
References
Jump up ^ Declaration  142- of the Soviet of the Republics of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union, formally establishing the dissolution of the Soviet Union as a state and subject of international law. (Russian)
Jump up ^ Scott Shane (2 October 1990). "73 Years of State Atheism in the Soviet Union, ended amid collapse in 1990". Baltimore Sun. Retrieved 13 October 2013.
Jump up ^ Historical Dictionary of Socialism. James C. Docherty, Peter Lamb. Page 85. "The Soviet Union was a one-party Marxist-Leninist state.".
Jump up ^ Ideology, Interests, and Identity. Stephen H. Hanson. Page 14. "the USSR was officially a Marxist-Leninist state"
Jump up ^ The Fine Line between the Enforcement of Human Rights Agreements and the Violation of National Sovereignty: The Case of Soviet Dissidents. Jennifer Noe Pahre. Page 336. "[...] the Soviet Union, as a Marxist-Leninist state [...]". Page 348. "The Soviet Union is a MarxistCLeninist state."
Jump up ^ Leninist National Policy: Solution to the "National Question"?. Walker Connor. Page 31. "[...] four Marxist-Leninist states (the Soviet Union, China, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia)[...]"
Jump up ^ The term "successor state of the Soviet Union" for the Russian Federation was laid down in paragraph 3 of article 1 and paragraph 7 of article 37 of the Federal law "On international treaties of the Russian Federation" of July 15, 1995 No. 101-FZ (adopted by the State Duma on 16 June 1995).  See Federal law of July 15, 1995  101-FZ On international treaties of the Russian Federation
Jump up ^ [The case of Mikhail Suprun: the story of political repression as an invasion of privacy http://echo.msk.ru/programs/kulshok/822592-echo/#element-text]
Jump up ^ On 13 January 1992 the Russian MFA has dispatched to heads of diplomatic missions in Moscow a note in which it was stated that the Russian Federation continues to exercise rights and perform obligations under all agreements concluded by the USSR. On the basis of the specified notes the international community implicitly recognized in the Russian Federation the status of a successor state of the USSR. See International treaties in the legal system of the Russian Federation
Jump up ^ Russia C Encyclopedia Britannica. Britannica.com (27 April 2010). Retrieved on 29 July 2013.
Jump up ^ Virginia Thompson. "The Former Soviet Union: Physical Geography" (PDF). Towson University: Department of Geography & Environmental Planning. Retrieved 24 March 2016.
Jump up ^ "The causes of the October Revolution". BBC. Retrieved 5 August 2014.
Jump up ^ Evan Mawdsley (1 March 2007). The Russian Civil War. Pegasus Books. p. 287. ISBN 978-1-933648-15-6.
Jump up ^ Richard Sakwa The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union, 1917C1991: 1917C1991. Routledge, 1999. ISBN 9780415122900. pp. 140C143.
Jump up ^ Julian Towster. Political Power in the U.S.S.R., 1917C1947: The Theory and Structure of Government in the Soviet State Oxford Univ. Press, 1948. p. 106.
Jump up ^ (Russian) Voted Unanimously for the Union. Archived 4 December 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ (Russian) Creation of the USSR at Khronos.ru.
Jump up ^ Lapin, G. G. (2000). "70 Years of Gidroproekt and Hydroelectric Power in Russia". Hydrotechnical Construction 34 (8/9): 374C379. doi:10.1023/A:1004107617449.
Jump up ^ (Russian) On GOELRO Plan  at Kuzbassenergo. Archived 26 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ The consolidation into a one-party regime took place during the first three and a half years after the revolution, which included the period of War communism and an election in which multiple parties competed. See Leonard Schapiro, The Origin of the Communist Autocracy: Political Opposition in the Soviet State, First Phase 1917C1922. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1955, 1966.
Jump up ^ Lenin, V.I. Collected Works. pp. 152C164, Vol. 31. The proletarian state must effect the transition to collective farming with extreme caution and only very gradually, by the force of example, without any coercion of the middle peasant.
Jump up ^ Stphane Courtois; Mark Kramer (15 October 1999). Livre noir du Communisme: crimes, terreur, rpression. Harvard University Press. p. 206. ISBN 978-0-674-07608-2.
Jump up ^ Abbott Gleason (2009). A companion to Russian history. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 373. ISBN 978-1-4051-3560-3.
^ Jump up to: a b Geoffrey A. Hosking (2001). Russia and the Russians: a history. Harvard University Press. p. 469. ISBN 978-0-674-00473-3.
Jump up ^ Ukrainian 'Holodomor' (man-made famine) Facts and History. Holodomorct.org (28 November 2006). Retrieved on 29 July 2013.
Jump up ^ (Russian) Mel'tiukhov, Mikhail. Upushchennyi shans Stalina: Sovietskii Soiuz i bor'ba za Evropu 1939C1941. Moscow: Veche, 2000. ISBN 5-7838-1196-3.
Jump up ^ William J. Duiker (31 August 2009). Contemporary World History. Wadsworth Pub Co. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-495-57271-8.
Jump up ^ Denunciation of the neutrality pact 5 April 1945. (Avalon Project at Yale University)
Jump up ^ Soviet Declaration of War on Japan, 8 August 1945. (Avalon Project at Yale University)
^ Jump up to: a b Geoffrey A. Hosking (2006). Rulers and victims: the Russians in the Soviet Union. Harvard University Press. p. 242. ISBN 978-0-674-02178-5.
Jump up ^ Brinkley, Douglas. The New York Times Living History: World War II, 1942C1945: The Allied Counteroffensive. Macmillan, 2004.
Jump up ^ Urquhart, Brian. Looking for the Sheriff. New York Review of Books, 16 July 1998.
Jump up ^ "Main Intelligence Administration (GRU) Glavnoye Razvedovatel'noye Upravlenie C Russia / Soviet Intelligence Agencies". Fas.org. Retrieved 24 November 2008.
Jump up ^ "Tank on the Moon". The Nature of Things with David Suzuki. 6 December 2007. CBC-TV. Archived from the original on 26 December 2008.
Jump up ^ Kenneth S. Deffeyes, Beyond Oil: The View from Hubbert's Peak.
Jump up ^ The red blues  Soviet politics by Brian Crozier, National Review, 25 June 1990.[dead link]
Jump up ^ Origins of Moral-Ethical Crisis and Ways to Overcome it by V.A.Drozhin Honoured Lawyer of Russia.
Jump up ^ Country Profile: Russia Foreign & Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom. Archived 11 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Child poverty soars in eastern Europe", BBC News, October 11, 2000
Jump up ^ McAaley, Alastair. Russia and the Baltics: Poverty and Poverty Research in a Changing World. Retrieved 18 July 2016.
Jump up ^ "An epidemic of street kids overwhelms Russian cities". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 17 July 2016.
Jump up ^ Targ, Harry (2006). Challenging Late Capitalism, Neoliberal Globalization, & Militarism.
Jump up ^ Theodore P. Gerber & Michael Hout, "More Shock than Therapy: Market Transition, Employment, and Income in Russia, 1991C1995", AJS Volume 104 Number 1 (July 1998): 1C50.
Jump up ^ Volkov, Vladimir. "The bitter legacy of Boris Yeltsin (1931-2007)".
Jump up ^ "Cops for hire". Economist. 2010. Retrieved 2015-12-04.
Jump up ^ "Corruption Perceptions Index 2014". Transparency International. Retrieved 2016-18-07. Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
Jump up ^ Hardt, John (2003). Russia's Uncertain Economic Future: With a Comprehensive Subject Index. M. E Sharpe. p. 481.
Jump up ^ Alexander, Catharine; Buchil, Victor; Humphrey, Caroline (12/09/2007). Urban Life in Post-Soviet Asia. CRC Press. Check date values in: |date= (help);
Jump up ^ Smorodinskaya. Encyclopaedia of Contemporary Russian. Routledge.
Jump up ^ Galazkaa, Artur. "Implications of the Diphtheria Epidemic in the Former Soviet Union for Immunization Programs". Journal of Infectious Diseases 181: 244C248. doi:10.1086/315570.
Jump up ^ Shubnikov, Eugene. "Non-communicable Diseases and Former Soviet Union countries". Retrieved 18 July 2016.
Jump up ^ Wharton, Melinda; Vitek, Charles. "Diphtheria in the Former Soviet Union: Reemergence of a Pandemic Disease". CDC: Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved 18 July 2016.
Jump up ^ Hoepller, C (2011). Russian Demographics: The Role of the Collapse of the Soviet Union.
Jump up ^ Poland, Marshall. "Russian Economy in the Aftermath of the Collapse of the Soviet Union". Retrieved 18 July 2016.
Jump up ^ David Stuckler, Lawrence King, and Martin McKee. "Mass privatisation and the post-communist mortality crisis: a cross-national analysis." The Lancet 373.9661 (2009): 399-407.
Jump up ^ Privatisation 'raised death rate'. BBC, 15 January 2009. Retrieved 19 November 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b c Buhler, Konrad G. (2001). State Succession and Membership in International Organizations. Legal Aspects of International Organization Series. Volume 38. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 164. ISBN 9789041115539.
Jump up ^ Talari, Pekka T. (1996). State Succession in Respect of Debts: The Effect of State Succession in the 1990's on the Rules of Law. The Finnish Yearbook of International Law 2. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 167. ISBN 9789041104694.
^ Jump up to: a b Sakwa, Richard. Soviet Politics in Perspective. 2nd ed. London C N.Y.: Routledge, 1998.
Jump up ^ Law, David A. (1975). Russian Civilization. Ardent Media. pp. 193C94. ISBN 978-0-8422-0529-0.
Jump up ^ Zemtsov, Ilya (1989). Chernenko: The Last Bolshevik: The Soviet Union on the Eve of Perestroika. Transaction Publishers. p. 325. ISBN 978-0-88738-260-4.
Jump up ^ Knight, Amy (1995). Beria: Stalin's First Lieutenant. Princeton University Press. p. 5. ISBN 0-691-01093-5.
Jump up ^ Hough, Jerry F.; Fainsod, Merle (1979). How the Soviet Union is Governed. Harvard University Press. p. 486. ISBN 0-674-41030-0.
Jump up ^ Service, Robert (2009). History of Modern Russia: From Tsarism to the Twenty-first Century. Penguin Books Ltd. p. 378. ISBN 0-14-103797-0.
Jump up ^     :    . Brunswick Publishing Corp. 1994. p. 82. ISBN 1-55618-142-6.
Jump up ^ gushi, Atsushi (2008). The Demise of the Soviet Communist Party. Routledge. pp. 31C32. ISBN 0-415-43439-4.
Jump up ^ Taras, Ray (1989). Leadership change in Communist states. Routledge. p. 132. ISBN 0-04-445277-2.
Jump up ^ F. Triska, Jan; Slusser, Robert M. (1962). The Theory, Law, and Policy of Soviet Treaties. Stanford University Press. pp. 63C64. ISBN 0-8047-0122-9.
Jump up ^ Deb, Kalipada (1996). Soviet Union to Commonwealth: Transformation and Challenges. M.D. Publications Pvt. Ltd. p. 81. ISBN 81-85880-95-6.
^ Jump up to: a b Benson, Shirley (2001). Nikita Khrushchev and the Creation of a Superpower. Penn State University Press. pp. XIV. ISBN 0-271-02170-5.
Jump up ^ The Communist World. Ardent Media. 2001. p. 441. ISBN 0-271-02170-5.
Jump up ^ Joseph Marie Feldbrugge, Ferdinand (1993). Russian Law: The End of the Soviet System and the Role of Law. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 205. ISBN 0-7923-2358-0.
Jump up ^ White, Stephen; J. Gill, Graeme; Slider, Darrell (1993). The Politics of Transition: Shaping a post-Soviet Future. Cambridge University Press. p. 108. ISBN 978-0-521-44634-1.
Jump up ^ P. Hoffmann, Erik; Laird, Robin Frederick (1984). The Soviet Polity in the Modern Era. Transaction Publishers. pp. 313C315. ISBN 0-202-24165-3.
Jump up ^ P. Hoffmann, Erik; Laird, Robin Frederick (1984). The Soviet Polity in the Modern Era. Transaction Publishers. pp. 315C319. ISBN 0-202-24165-3.
Jump up ^ "The Soviet Polity in the Modern Era". Great Russian Encyclopedia (Bol'shaya Rossiyskaya Enciklopediya Publisher) 1: 742. 2005.
Jump up ^ Sakwa, Richard (1998). Soviet Politics in Perspective. Routledge. p. 106. ISBN 0-415-07153-4.
Jump up ^ Kucherov, Samuel (1970). The Organs of Soviet Administration of Justice: Their History and Operation. Brill Archive Publishers. p. 31.
Jump up ^ Phillips, Steve (2000). Lenin and the Russian Revolution. Heinemann. p. 71. ISBN 978-0-435-32719-4.
Jump up ^ Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Encyclop?dia Britannica (Encyclop?dia Britannica, Inc.). 2005. p. 1014.
Jump up ^ Service, Robert (2009). History of Modern Russia: From Tsarism to the Twenty-first Century. Penguin Books Ltd. p. 379. ISBN 0-14-103797-0.
^ Jump up to: a b Khrushchev, Nikita (2007). Memoirs of Nikita Khrushchev, Volume 3: Statesman. Pennsylvania State University Press. p. 674. ISBN 978-0-271-02935-1.
Jump up ^ Polley, Martin (2000). ACZ of modern Europe since 1789. Routledge. p. 88. ISBN 0-415-18597-1.
Jump up ^ "Gorbachev's Reform Dilemma". Library of Congress Country Studies. Retrieved 16 October 2010.
Jump up ^ Polmar, Norman (1991). The Naval Institute Guide to the Soviet. United States Naval Institute. p. 1. ISBN 0-87021-241-9.
Jump up ^ McCauley, Martin (2007). The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union. Pearson Education. p. 490. ISBN 0-582-78465-4.
Jump up ^ Government of the USSR: Gorbachev, Mikhail (21 March 1972). :      [Law: About state governing bodies of USSR in a transition period On the bodies of state authority and administration of the USSR in Transition] (in Russian). sssr.su. Retrieved 15 October 1991. Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
Jump up ^ Vincent Daniels, Robert (1993). A Documentary History of Communism in Russia: From Lenin to Gorbachev. University Press of New England (UPNE). p. 388. ISBN 0-87451-616-1.
Jump up ^ Encyclop?dia Britannica. "Inquisitorial procedure (law) C Britannica Online Encyclopedia". Encyclop?dia Britannica, Inc. Retrieved 30 October 2010.
Jump up ^ Adams, Simon (2005). Russian Republics. Black Rabbit Books. p. 21. ISBN 978-1-58340-606-9.
Jump up ^ Feldbrugge, Ferdinand Joseph Maria (1993). Russian Law: The Rnd of the Soviet system and the Role of Law. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 94. ISBN 0-7923-2358-0.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e f Gregory, Paul R. (2004). The Political Economy of Stalinism: Evidence from the Soviet Secret Archives. Cambridge University Press. pp. 218C20. ISBN 0-521-53367-8.
Jump up ^ Mawdsley, Evan (1998). The Stalin Years: The Soviet Union, 1929C1953. Manchester University Press. p. 30. ISBN 0-7190-4600-9.
Jump up ^ Wheatcroft, S. G.; Davies, R. W.; Cooper, J. M. (1986). Soviet Industrialization Reconsidered: Some Preliminary Conclusions about Economic Development between 1926 and 1941 39. Economic History Review. pp. 30C2. ISBN 978-0-7190-4600-1.
Jump up ^ "Reconstruction and Cold War". Library of Congress. Retrieved 23 October 2010.
^ Jump up to: a b c d "Reconstruction and Cold War". Library of Congress Country Studies. Retrieved 23 October 2010.
Jump up ^ IMF and OECD (1991). A Study of the Soviet Economy 1. International Monetary Fund. p. 9. ISBN 0-14-103797-0.
^ Jump up to: a b "Economy". Library of Congress Country Studies. Retrieved 23 October 2010.
^ Jump up to: a b Hanson, Philip. The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Economy: An Economic History of the USSR from 1945. London: Longman, 2003.
Jump up ^ Bergson, Abram (1997). "How Big was the Soviet GDP?". Comparative Economic Studies 39 (1): 1C14. doi:10.1057/ces.1997.1.
Jump up ^ Harrison, Mark (1993). "Soviet Economic Growth Since 1928: The Alternative Statistics of G. I. Khanin". EuropeCAsia Studies 45 (1): 141C167. doi:10.1080/09668139308412080.
Jump up ^ Gvosdev, Nikolas (2008). The Strange Death of Soviet communism: A Postscript. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 1-4128-0698-4.
Jump up ^ Fischer, Stanley; Easterly, William (1994). "The Soviet Economic Decline, Historical and Republican Data" (PDF). World Bank. Retrieved 23 October 2010.
Jump up ^ Rosefielde, Steven (1996). "Stalinism in Post-Communist Perspective: New Evidence on Killings, Forced Labour and Economic Growth in the 1930s". Europe-Asia Studies (Taylor & Francis, Ltd.) 48 (6): 956C987. JSTOR 152635. The new evidence shows that administrative command planning and Stalin's forced industrialization strategies failed in the 1930s and beyond. The economic miracle chronicled in official hagiographies and until recently faithfully recounted in Western textbooks has no basis in fact. It is the statistical artefact not of index number relativity (the Gerschenkron effect) but of misapplying to the calculation of growth cost prices that do not accurately measure competitive value. The standard of living declined during the 1930s in response to Stalin's despotism, and after a brief improvement following his death, lapsed into stagnation. Glasnost and post-communist revelations interpreted as a whole thus provide no basis for Getty, Rittersporn & Zemskov's relatively favourable characterization of the methods, economic achievements and human costs of Stalinism. The evidence demonstrates that the suppression of markets and the oppression of vast segments of the population were economically counterproductive and humanly calamitous, just as anyone conversant with classical economic theory should have expected.
Jump up ^ Central Intelligence Agency (1991). "GDP C Million 1990". The World Factbook. Retrieved 12 June 2010.
Jump up ^ Central Intelligence Agency (1992). "GDP Per Capita C 1991". The World Factbook. Retrieved 12 June 2010.
Jump up ^ Wilson, David (1983). The Demand for Energy in the Soviet Union. Rowman and Littfield. pp. 105 to 108. ISBN 9780709927044.
Jump up ^ Wilson 1983, p. 295.
Jump up ^ Wilson 1983, p. 297.
Jump up ^ Wilson 1983, p. 297C99.
Jump up ^ Wilson 1983, p. 299.
^ Jump up to: a b c Central Intelligence Agency (1991). "Soviet Union C Communications". The World Factbook. Retrieved 20 October 2010.
Jump up ^ Central Intelligence Agency (1992). "Soviet Union C Economy". The World Factbook. Retrieved 23 October 2010.
Jump up ^ Hardt, John Pearce; Hardt, John P. (2003). Russia's Uncertain Economic Future: With a Comprehensive Subject Index. M.E. Sharpe. p. 233. ISBN 0-7656-1208-9.
Jump up ^ "Science and Technology". Library of Congress Country Studies. Retrieved 23 October 2010.
Jump up ^ Rose Eveleth (12 December 2013). Soviet Russia Had a Better Record of Training Women in STEM Than America Does Today. Smithsonian.com. Retrieved 26 June 2014.
Jump up ^ MacFarland, Margo (3 May 1990). "Global Tech Strategies Brought to U.S". Washington Technology.
Jump up ^ Deckert, R.A. (10 October 1990). "The science of uncovering industrial information". Business Journal of the Treasure Coast.
Jump up ^ "U.S. Firms Must Trade Short-Term Gains for Long-Term Technology Planning". Inside the Pentagon. 7 March 1991.
Jump up ^ Highman, Robert D.S.; Greenwood, John T.; Hardesty, Von (1998). Russian Aviation and Air Power in the Twentieth Century. Routledge. p. 134. ISBN 978-0-7146-4784-5.
^ Jump up to: a b Wilson 1983, p. 205.
Jump up ^ Wilson 1983, p. 201.
Jump up ^ Ambler, Shaw and Symons 1985, p. 166C67.
Jump up ^ Ambler, Shaw and Symons 1985, p. 168.
Jump up ^ Ambler, Shaw and Symons 1985, p. 165.
^ Jump up to: a b Ambler, Shaw and Symons 1985, p. 167.
Jump up ^ Ambler, Shaw and Symons 1985, p. 169.
Jump up ^ International Monetary Fund and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 1991, p. 56.
Jump up ^ Mark Harrison (18 July 2002). Accounting for War: Soviet Production, Employment, and the Defence Burden, 1940C1945. Cambridge University Press. p. 167. ISBN 978-0-521-89424-1.
Jump up ^ Jay Winter; Emmanuel Sivan (2000). War and Remembrance in the Twentieth Century. Cambridge University Press. p. 64. ISBN 0521794366.
Jump up ^ Government of the USSR (1977).    [Great Soviet Encyclopaedia] (in Russian) 24. Moscow: State Committee for Publishing. p. 15.
Jump up ^ Anderson, Barbara A. (1990). Growth and Diversity of the Population of the Soviet Union 510. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences. pp. 155C77.
Jump up ^ Vallin, J.; Chesnais, J.C. (1970). Recent Developments of Mortality in Europe, English-Speaking Countries and the Soviet Union, 1960C1970 29. Population Studies. pp. 861C898.
Jump up ^ Ryan, Michael (28 May 1988). Life Expectancy and Mortality Data from the Soviet Union. British Medical Journal 296. p. 1,513C1515.
Jump up ^ Davis, Christopher; Feshbach, Murray. Rising Infant Mortality in the USSR in the 1970s. Washington, D.C.: United States Census Bureau. p. 95.
Jump up ^ Krimins, Juris (3C7 December 1990). The Changing Mortality Patterns in Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia: Experience of the Past Three Decades. Paper presented at the International Conference on Health, Morbidity and Mortality by Cause of Death in Europe.
Jump up ^ Sheila Fitzpatrick, Education and Social Mobility in the Soviet Union 1921C1934, Cambridge University Press (16 May 2002), ISBN 0521894239
Jump up ^ Law, David A. (1975). Russian Civilization. Ardent Media. pp. 300C1. ISBN 0-8422-0529-2.
Jump up ^ Mikhail Shifman, ed. (2005). You Failed Your Math Test, Comrade Einstein: Adventures and Misadventures of Young Mathematicians Or Test Your Skills in Almost Recreational Mathematics. World Scientific.
Jump up ^ Edward Frenkel (October 2012). "The Fifth problem: math & anti-Semitism in the Soviet Union". The New Criterion.
Jump up ^ Dominic Lawson (October 11, 2011). "More migrants please, especially the clever ones". The Independent (London).
Jump up ^ Andre Geim (2010). "Biographical". Nobelprize.org.
Jump up ^ Shlapentokh, Vladimir (1990). Soviet Intellectuals and Political Power: The Post-Stalin Era. I.B. Tauris. p. 26. ISBN 978-1-85043-284-5.
Jump up ^ Pejovich, Svetozar (1990). The Economics of Property Rights: Towards a Theory of Comparative Systems. Springer Science+Business Media. p. 130. ISBN 978-0-7923-0878-2.
Jump up ^ Central Intelligence Agency (1991). "Soviet Union C People". The World Factbook. Retrieved 25 October 2010.
Jump up ^ Comrie 1981, p. 2.
Jump up ^ Comrie 1981, p. 3.
Jump up ^ Hosking, Geoffrey (13 March 2006). "Rulers and Victims: The Russians in the Soviet Union". History Today. Retrieved 25 October 2010. (pay-fee)
Jump up ^ Lane 1992, p. 353.
Jump up ^ Lane 1992, p. 352.
Jump up ^ Lane 1992, p. 352C53.
Jump up ^ Dinkel, R.H. (1990). The Seeming Paradox of Increasing Mortality in a Highly Industrialized Nation: the Example of the Soviet Union. pp. 155C77.
Jump up ^ Comrie 1981, p. 3C4.
Jump up ^ Comrie 1981, p. 4.
Jump up ^ Comrie 1981, p. 25.
Jump up ^ Comrie 1981, p. 26.
Jump up ^ Comrie 1981, p. 27.
Jump up ^    24 April 1990     [Law of the USSR from 24 April 1990 On languages of the USSR] (in Russian). Government of the Soviet Union. 24 April 1990. Retrieved 24 October 2010.
Jump up ^ 20% Russian Orthodox; 10% Muslim; 7% Protestant, Armenian Apostolic, Georgian Orthodox, and Roman Catholic; less than 1% Jewish; 60% atheist
^ Jump up to: a b c Eaton, Katherine Bliss (2004). Daily life in the Soviet Union. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 285 and 286. ISBN 0-313-31628-7.
Jump up ^ Silvio Ferrari; W. Cole Durham; Elizabeth A. Sewell (2003). Law and religion in post-communist Europe. Peeters Pub & Booksellers. p. 261. ISBN 978-90-429-1262-5.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Simon 1974, pp. 64C65.
Jump up ^ Simon 1974, p. 209.
Jump up ^ Atwood, Craig D. (2001). Always Reforming: A History of Christianity Since 1300. Macon, Georgia: Mercer University Press. p. 311. ISBN 0-86554-679-7.
^ Jump up to: a b c Janz 1998, pp. 38C39.
Jump up ^ Ro'i, Yaacov (1995). Jews and Jewish Life in Russia and the Soviet Union. London: Frank Cass. p. 263. ISBN 0-7146-4619-9.
^ Jump up to: a b Nahaylo, Bohdan & Victor Swoboda (1990). Soviet Disunion: A History of the Nationalities Problem in the USSR. London: Hamish Hamilton. p. 144. ISBN 0-02-922401-2.
Jump up ^ Mark D. Steinberg; Catherine Wanner (October 2008). Religion, morality, and community in post-Soviet societies. Indiana University Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-0-253-22038-7.
Jump up ^ Janz 1998, p. 42.
Jump up ^ McKay, George; Williams, Christopher (2009). Subcultures and New Religious Movements in Russia and East-Central Europe. Peter Lang. pp. 231C32. ISBN 3-03911-921-4.
Jump up ^ Warshofsky Lapidus 1978, p. 3.
Jump up ^ 'On the other hand...' See the index of Stalin and His Hangmen by Donald Rayfield, 2004, Random House
Jump up ^ Rayfield 2004, pp. 317C320.
Jump up ^ "Gorbachev, Mikhail." Encyclop?dia Britannica. 2007. Encyclop?dia Britannica Online. 2 October 2007 <http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-9037405>. "Under his new policy of glasnost ("openness"), a major cultural thaw took place: freedoms of expression and of information were significantly expanded; the press and broadcasting were allowed unprecedented candour in their reportage and criticism; and the country's legacy of Stalinist totalitarian rule was eventually completely repudiated by the government."
Bibliography
Ambler, John; Shaw, Denis J.B.; Symons, Leslie (1985). Soviet and East European Transport Problems. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-7099-0557-8.
Comrie, Bernard (1981). The Languages of the Soviet Union. Cambridge University Press (CUP) Archive. ISBN 978-0-521-29877-3.
Janz, Denis (1998). World Christianity and Marxism. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-511944-2.
Lane, David Stuart (1992). Soviet Society under Perestroika. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-07600-5.
Rayfield, Donald (2004). Stalin and His Hangmen: An Authoritative Portrait of a Tyrant and Those Who Served Him. Viking Press. ISBN 978-0-375-75771-6.
Simon, Gerard (1974). Church, State, and Opposition in the U.S.S.R. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-02612-4.
Wilson, David (1983). The Demand for Energy in the Soviet Union. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-7099-2704-4.
World Bank and OECD (1991). A Study of the Soviet economy 3. International Monetary Fund. ISBN 9789264134683.
Palat, Madhavan K. (2001). Social Identities in Revolutionary Russia. UK: Palgrave. ISBN 978-0-333-92947-6. Retrieved 26 May 2012.
Warshofsky Lapidus, Gail (1978). Women in Soviet Society: Equality, Development, and Social Change. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-03938-4.
Further reading
See also: List of primary and secondary sources on the Cold War
Surveys
A Country Study: Soviet Union (Former). Library of Congress Country Studies, 1991.
Brown, Archie, et al., eds.: The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Russia and the Soviet Union (Cambridge University Press, 1982).
Gilbert, Martin: The Routledge Atlas of Russian History (London: Routledge, 2002).
Gorodetsky, Gabriel, ed. Soviet Foreign Policy, 1917C1991: A Retrospective (2014)
Grant, Ted. Russia, from Revolution to Counter-Revolution, London, Well Red Publications, 1997
Hosking, Geoffrey. The First Socialist Society: A History of the Soviet Union from Within (2nd ed. Harvard UP 1992) 570pp
Howe, G. Melvyn: The Soviet Union: A Geographical Survey 2nd. edn. (Estover, UK: MacDonald and Evans, 1983).
Kort, Michael. The Soviet Colossus: History and Aftermath (7th ed. 2010) 502pp
McCauley, Martin. The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union (2007), 522 pages.
Moss, Walter G. A History of Russia. Vol. 2: Since 1855. 2d ed. Anthem Press, 2005.
Nove, Alec. An Economic History of the USSR, 1917C1991. (3rd ed. 1993)
Pipes, Richard. Communism: A History (2003)
Service, Robert. A History of Twentieth-Century Russia. (2nd ed. 1999)
Lenin and Leninism
Clark, Ronald W. Lenin (1988). 570 pp.
Debo, Richard K. Survival and Consolidation: The Foreign Policy of Soviet Russia, 1918C1921 (1992).
Marples, David R. Lenin's Revolution: Russia, 1917C1921 (2000) 156pp. short survey
Pipes, Richard. A Concise History of the Russian Revolution (1996) excerpt and text search, by a leading conservative
Pipes, Richard. Russia under the Bolshevik Regime. (1994). 608 pp.
Service, Robert. Lenin: A Biography (2002), 561pp; standard scholarly biography; a short version of his 3 vol detailed biography
Volkogonov, Dmitri. Lenin: Life and Legacy (1994). 600 pp.
Stalin and Stalinism
Daniels, R. V., ed. The Stalin Revolution (1965)
Davies, Sarah, and James Harris, eds. Stalin: A New History, (2006), 310pp, 14 specialized essays by scholars excerpt and text search
De Jonge, Alex. Stalin and the Shaping of the Soviet Union (1986)
Fitzpatrick, Sheila, ed. Stalinism: New Directions, (1999), 396pp excerpts from many scholars on the impact of Stalinism on the people (little on Stalin himself) online edition
Fitzpatrick, Sheila. "Impact of the Opening of Soviet Archives on Western Scholarship on Soviet Social History." Russian Review 74#3 (2015): 377C400; historiography
Hoffmann, David L. ed. Stalinism: The Essential Readings, (2002) essays by 12 scholars
Laqueur, Walter. Stalin: The Glasnost Revelations (1990)
Kershaw, Ian, and Moshe Lewin. Stalinism and Nazism: Dictatorships in Comparison (2004) excerpt and text search
Lee, Stephen J. Stalin and the Soviet Union (1999) online edition
Lewis, Jonathan. Stalin: A Time for Judgement (1990)
McNeal, Robert H. Stalin: Man and Ruler (1988)
Martens, Ludo. Another view of Stalin (1994), a highly favorable view from a Maoist historian
Service, Robert. Stalin: A Biography (2004), along with Tucker the standard biography
Trotsky, Leon. Stalin: An Appraisal of the Man and His Influence, (1967), an interpretation by Stalin's worst enemy
Tucker, Robert C. Stalin as Revolutionary, 1879C1929 (1973); Stalin in Power: The Revolution from Above, 1929C1941. (1990) online edition with Service, a standard biography; online at ACLS e-books
World War II
Barber, John, and Mark Harrison. The Soviet Home Front: A Social and Economic History of the USSR in World War II, Longman, 1991.
Bellamy, Chris. Absolute War: Soviet Russia in the Second World War (2008), 880pp excerpt and text search
Berkhoff, Karel C. Harvest of Despair: Life and Death in Ukraine Under Nazi Rule. Harvard U. Press, 2004. 448 pp.
Berkhoff, Karel C. Motherland in Danger: Soviet Propaganda during World War II (2012) excerpt and text search covers both propaganda and reality of homefront conditions
Braithwaite, Rodric. Moscow 1941: A City and Its People at War (2006)
Broekmeyer, Marius. Stalin, the Russians, and Their War, 1941C1945. 2004. 315 pp.
Dallin, Alexander. Odessa, 1941C1944: A Case Study of Soviet Territory under Foreign Rule. Portland: Int. Specialized Book Service, 1998. 296 pp.
Kucherenko, Olga. Little Soldiers: How Soviet Children Went to War, 1941C1945 (2011) excerpt and text search
Overy, Richard. Russia's War: A History of the Soviet Effort: 1941C1945 (1998) 432pp excerpt and txt search
Overy, Richard. Russia's War: A History of the Soviet Effort: 1941C1945 (1998) excerpt and text search
Roberts, Geoffrey. Stalin's Wars: From World War to Cold War, 1939C1953 (2006).
Schofield, Carey, ed. Russian at War, 1941C1945. Text by Georgii Drozdov and Evgenii Ryabko, [with] introd. by Vladimir Karpov [and] pref. by Harrison E. Salisbury, ed. by Carey Schofield. New York: Vendome Press, 1987. 256 p., copiously ill. with b&2 photos and occasional maps. N.B.: This is mostly a photo-history, with connecting texts. ISBN 978-0-86565-077-0
Seaton, Albert. Stalin as Military Commander, (1998) online edition
Thurston, Robert W., and Bernd Bonwetsch, eds. The People's War: Responses to World War II in the Soviet Union (2000)
Vallin, Jacques; Mesl, France; Adamets, Serguei; and Pyrozhkov, Serhii. "A New Estimate of Ukrainian Population Losses During the Crises of the 1930s and 1940s." Population Studies (2002) 56(3): 249C264. in JSTOR Reports life expectancy at birth fell to a level as low as ten years for females and seven for males in 1933 and plateaued around 25 for females and 15 for males in the period 1941C44.
Cold War
Brzezinski, Zbigniew. The Grand Failure: The Birth and Death of Communism in the Twentieth Century (1989)
Edmonds, Robin. Soviet Foreign Policy: The Brezhnev Years (1983)
Goncharov, Sergei, John Lewis and Litai Xue, Uncertain Partners: Stalin, Mao and the Korean War (1993) excerpt and text search
Gorlizki, Yoram, and Oleg Khlevniuk. Cold Peace: Stalin and the Soviet Ruling Circle, 1945C1953 (2004) online edition
Holloway, David. Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy, 1939C1956 (1996) excerpt and text search
Mastny, Vojtech. Russia's Road to the Cold War: Diplomacy, Warfare, and the Politics of Communism, 1941C1945 (1979)
Mastny, Vojtech. The Cold War and Soviet Insecurity: The Stalin Years (1998) excerpt and text search; online complete edition
Nation, R. Craig. Black Earth, Red Star: A History of Soviet Security Policy, 1917C1991 (1992)
Sivachev, Nikolai and Nikolai Yakolev, Russia and the United States (1979), by Soviet historians
Taubman, William. Khrushchev: The Man and His Era (2004), Pulitzer Prize; excerpt and text search
Ulam, Adam B. Expansion and Coexistence: Soviet Foreign Policy, 1917C1973, 2nd ed. (1974)
Zubok, Vladislav M. Inside the Kremlin's Cold War (1996) 20% excerpt and online search
Zubok, Vladislav M. A Failed Empire: The Soviet Union in the Cold War from Stalin to Gorbachev (2007)
Collapse
Beschloss, Michael, and Strobe Talbott. At the Highest Levels:The Inside Story of the End of the Cold War (1993)
Bialer, Seweryn and Michael Mandelbaum, eds. Gorbachev's Russia and American Foreign Policy (1988).
Carrre d'Encausse, Hlne. Decline of an Empire: the Soviet Socialist Republics in Revolt. First English language ed. New York: Newsweek Books (1979). 304 p. N.B.: Trans. of the author's L'Empire clat. ISBN 0-88225-280-1
Garthoff, Raymond. The Great Transition: AmericanCSoviet Relations and the End of the Cold War (1994), detailed narrative
Grachev, A.S. Gorbachev's Gamble: Soviet Foreign Policy and the End of the Cold War (2008) excerpt and text search
Hogan, Michael ed. The End of the Cold War. Its Meaning and Implications (1992) articles from Diplomatic History
Roger Keeran and Thomas Keeny. Socialism Betrayed: Behind the Collapse of the Soviet Union, International Publishers Co Inc., U.S. 2004
Kotkin, Stephen. Armageddon Averted: The Soviet Collapse, 1970C2000 (2008) excerpt and text search
Matlock, Jack. Autopsy on an Empire: The American Ambassador's Account of the Collapse of the Soviet Union (1995)
Pons, S., Romero, F., Reinterpreting the End of the Cold War: Issues, Interpretations, Periodizations, (2005) ISBN 0-7146-5695-X
Remnick, David. Lenin's Tomb: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire, (1994), ISBN 0-679-75125-4
Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr. Rebuilding Russia: Reflections and Tentative Proposals, trans. and annotated by Alexis Klimoff. First ed. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1991. N.B.: Also discusses the other national constituents of the U.S.S.R. ISBN 0-374-17342-7
Specialty studies
Armstrong, John A. The Politics of Totalitarianism: The Communist Party of the Soviet Union from 1934 to the Present. New York: Random House, 1961.
Katz, Zev, ed.: Handbook of Major Soviet Nationalities (New York: Free Press, 1975).
Moore, Jr., Barrington. Soviet politics: the dilemma of power. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1950.
Rizzi, Bruno: The Bureaucratization of the World: The First English edition of the Underground Marxist Classic That Analyzed Class Exploitation in the USSR, New York, NY: Free Press, 1985.
Schapiro, Leonard B. The Origin of the Communist Autocracy: Political Opposition in the Soviet State, First Phase 1917C1922. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1955, 1966.
 This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the Library of Congress Country Studies.

External links
Find more about
Soviet Union
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Search Wiktionary	Definitions from Wiktionary
Search Commons	Media from Commons
Search Wikiquote	Quotations from Wikiquote
Search Wikisource	Texts from Wikisource
Search Wikivoyage	Travel guide from Wikivoyage
 Wikimedia Atlas of the Soviet Union
Impressions of Soviet Russia, by John Dewey.
Documents and other forms of media from the Soviet Union: 1917C1991.
A Country Study: Soviet Union (Former)
Soviet Union Exhibit at Global Museum on Communism with essay by Richard Pipes
Majority in former Soviet states believe breakup was harmful mistake C poll. RT, 21 December 2013.
[show] v t e
Soviet Union topics
[show] 
Administrative division of the Soviet Union
[show] v t e
Socialism by country
[show] v t e
Eastern Bloc
[show] v t e
Russia articles
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 123694235 LCCN: n80126312 ISNI: 0000 0001 2375 1518 GND: 4077548-3 SUDOC: 026402629 BNF: cb11865668d (data) NLA: 36332432 NDL: 00743732
Categories: Former countries in EuropeFormer countries in AsiaStates and territories established in 1922Soviet UnionCommunism in RussiaCommunist statesEarly Soviet republicsFormer member states of the United NationsFormer polities of the Cold WarFormer Slavic countriesFormer socialist republicsHistory of the Soviet Union and Soviet RussiaModern history of RussiaOne-party statesSoviet statesStates and territories disestablished in 19911922 establishments in the Soviet Union1991 disestablishments in the Soviet Union20th century in RussiaAtheist statesSuperpowers
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikivoyage
Languages
Ach

Afrikaans
Alemannisch
????
?nglisc
???????
Aragons
Asturianu
Ava?e'?

Az?rbaycanca
??????
?????
Ban-lam-g
?

 (?)?

Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg

Catal
?
Cebuano
?e?tina
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
??????????
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
?
Espa?ol
Esperanto
Estreme?u
Euskara
?????
F?royskt
Fran?ais
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gidhlig
Galego
MZ
?????
???????
????????????
Z/Hak-ka-ng?
???
???????
??????
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue

slenska
Italiano
?????
Basa Jawa
?????
-
???????
????? / ?????
??
Kernowek
Kiswahili

Kurd?

Ladino

???? ??????
Latina
Latvie?u
L?tzebuergesch
Lietuvi?
Ligure
Limburgs
La .lojban.
Lumbaart
Magyar

Malagasy
??????
?????
?????????
????
????????
Bahasa Melayu
Mng-d??ng-ng??



??????????
Nederlands
Nedersaksies
??????
Z
Napulitano

Nordfriisk
Norsk bokm?l
Norsk nynorsk
Nouormand
Occitan
 
O?zbekcha/?
??????
??????
Papiamentu
????
Patois
?????????
Plattdtsch
Polski
Portugus
Q?r?mtatarca
Roman?
Rumantsch
Runa Simi


 
Smegiella
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Shqip
Sicilianu
?????
Simple English
Sloven?ina
Sloven??ina
? / ??????????
?l?nski
Soomaaliga
?????? ???????
 / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / 
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
?????
/tatar?a
??????
???
??
Trk?e
 

?
????
???????? / Uyghurche
Vahcuengh
Vneto
Veps?n kel
Ti?ng Vi?t
V?ro
Walon

West-Vlams
Winaray
Wolof

??????
Yorb
Z
Zazaki
?emait??ka

Edit links
This page was last modified on 21 July 2016, at 13:31.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
 Page semi-protected
Joseph Stalin
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Stalin" redirects here. For other uses, see Stalin (disambiguation).
Joseph Stalin
 
????? ???????
Jughashvili I., 1935.png
An official portrait of Stalin from 1937.
General secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
In office
3 April 1922 C 16 October 1952
Preceded by	Vyacheslav Molotov
(as Responsible Secretary)
Succeeded by	Nikita Khrushchev
(office reestablished)
Chairman of the Council of Ministers
In office
6 May 1941 C 5 March 1953
First Deputies	Nikolai Voznesensky
Vyacheslav Molotov
Nikolai Bulganin
Preceded by	Vyacheslav Molotov
Succeeded by	Georgy Malenkov
Personal details
Born	Ioseb Besarionis dze Jughashvili
18 December 1878
Gori, Tiflis Governorate, Russian Empire
Died	5 March 1953 (aged 74)
Kuntsevo Dacha, Kuntsevo, Russian SFSR, Soviet Union
Resting place	Lenin's Mausoleum, Moscow (9 March 1953 C 31 October 1961)
Kremlin Wall Necropolis, Moscow (from 31 October 1961)
Nationality	Soviet
Georgian
Political party	Communist Party of the Soviet Union
Spouse(s)	Ekaterina Svanidze
(1906C07)
Nadezhda Alliluyeva
(1919C32)
Children	Yakov Dzhugashvili
Vasily Dzhugashvili
Svetlana Alliluyeva
Parents	Besarion Jughashvili and Ketevan Geladze
Religion	None (atheism) prev. Georgian Orthodox
Signature	
Military service
Nickname(s)	Koba
Allegiance	 Soviet Union
Service/branch	Soviet Armed Forces
Years of service	1943C53
Rank	Marshal of the Soviet Union (1943C45)
Generalissimus of the Soviet Union (1945C53)
Commands	All (supreme commander)
Battles/wars	World War II
Central institution membership[show]
Other offices held[show]
Joseph Vissarionovich Stalin (Russian: ? ? ?, /?st?l?n/;[1] birth surname: Jughashvili; 18 December 1878[2] C 5 March 1953) was the leader of the Soviet Union from the mid-1920s until his death in 1953. Holding the post of the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, he was effectively the dictator of the state.

Stalin was one of the seven members of the first Politburo, founded in 1917 in order to manage the Bolshevik Revolution, alongside Lenin, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Trotsky, Sokolnikov and Bubnov.[3] Among the Bolshevik revolutionaries who took part in the Russian Revolution of 1917, Stalin was appointed General Secretary of the party's Central Committee in 1922. He subsequently managed to consolidate power following the 1924 death of Vladimir Lenin by suppressing Lenin's criticisms (in the postscript of his testament) and expanding the functions of his role, all the while eliminating any opposition. He remained General Secretary until the post was abolished in 1952, concurrently serving as the Premier of the Soviet Union from 1941 onward.

Under Stalin's rule, the concept of "Socialism in One Country" became a central tenet of Soviet society, contrary to Leon Trotsky's view that socialism must be spread through continuous international revolutions. He replaced the New Economic Policy introduced by Lenin in the early 1920s with a highly centralised command economy, launching a period of industrialization and collectivization that resulted in the rapid transformation of the USSR from an agrarian society into an industrial power.[4] However, the economic changes coincided with the imprisonment of millions of people in Gulag labour camps.[5] The initial upheaval in agriculture disrupted food production and contributed to the catastrophic Soviet famine of 1932C33, known in Ukraine as the Holodomor. Between 1934 and 1939 he organized and led a massive purge (known as "Great Purge") of the party, government, armed forces and intelligentsia, in which millions of so-called "enemies of the working class" were imprisoned, exiled or executed, often without due process. Major figures in the Communist Party and government, and many Red Army high commanders, were killed after being convicted of treason in show trials.[6]

In August 1939, after failed attempts to conclude anti-Hitler pacts with other major European powers, Stalin entered into a non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany that divided their influence and territory within Eastern Europe, resulting in their invasion of Poland in September of that year, but Germany later violated the agreement and launched a massive invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941. Despite heavy human and territorial losses, Soviet forces managed to halt the Nazi incursion after the decisive Battles of Moscow and Stalingrad. After defeating the Axis powers on the Eastern Front, the Red Army captured Berlin in May 1945, effectively ending the war in Europe for the Allies.[7][8] The Soviet Union subsequently emerged as one of two recognized world superpowers, the other being the United States.[9] Communist governments loyal to the Soviet Union were established in most countries freed from German occupation by the Red Army, which later constituted the Eastern Bloc. Stalin also had close relations with Mao Zedong in China and Kim Il-sung in North Korea.

Stalin led the Soviet Union through its post-war reconstruction phase, which saw a significant rise in tension with the Western world that would later be known as the Cold War. During this period, the USSR became the second country in the world to successfully develop a nuclear weapon, as well as launching the Great Plan for the Transformation of Nature in response to another widespread famine and the Great Construction Projects of Communism. In the years following his death, Stalin and his regime have been condemned on numerous occasions, most notably in 1956 when his successor Nikita Khrushchev denounced his legacy and initiated a process of de-Stalinization and rehabilitation to victims of his regime. Stalin remains a controversial figure today, with many regarding him as a tyrant.[10] However, popular opinion within the Russian Federation is mixed.[11][12][13] The exact number of deaths caused by Stalin's regime is still a subject of debate, but it is widely agreed to be in the order of millions.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Early life
2	Revolution and war
2.1	World War I
2.2	Russian Revolution of 1917
2.3	Russian Civil War, 1917C1919
2.4	PolishCSoviet War, 1919C21
3	Rise to power
4	Changes to Soviet society, 1927C1939
4.1	Bolstering Soviet secret service and intelligence
4.2	Cult of personality
4.3	Purges and deportations
4.4	Collectivization
4.5	Famines
4.6	Industrialization
4.7	Science
4.8	Social services
4.9	Culture
4.10	Religion
4.11	Theorist
5	Calculating the number of victims
6	World War II, 1939C45
6.1	Pact with Hitler
6.2	Implementing the division of Eastern Europe and other invasions
6.3	Hitler breaks the pact
6.4	Soviets stop the Germans
6.5	Soviet push to Germany
6.6	Final victory
6.7	Nobel Peace Prize nominations
6.8	Human rights abuses
6.9	Allied conferences on post-war Europe
6.10	War against Japan
7	Post-war era, 1945C1953
7.1	The Iron Curtain and the Eastern Bloc
7.2	Asia
7.3	Israel
7.4	Falsifiers of History
7.5	Domestic support
7.6	"Doctors' plot"
8	Death and legacy
8.1	Suggestions of assassination
8.2	Announcement and Reactions
8.3	Aftermath
8.4	Reaction by successors
8.5	Views on Stalin in contemporary Russia
8.6	Views on Stalin in other former Soviet states
9	Personal life
9.1	Origin of name, nicknames and pseudonyms
9.2	Appearance
9.3	Marriages and family
9.4	Other relationships
9.5	Habits
9.6	Religion
10	Controversies about Stalin
11	Decorations and awards
12	Works
13	See also
14	Notes
15	References
16	External links
Early life
Main article: Early life of Joseph Stalin


Stalin aged 15 (left) and 23 (right)
Stalin's birth name in Georgian was Ioseb Besarionis dze Jughashvili (????? ?????????? ?? ?????????). He was born an ethnic Georgian; Georgia was then part of the Russian Empire. The Russian-language version of his birth name was Iosif Vissarionovich Dzhugashvili (? ? ?).

Ioseb was born on 18 December 1878[2] in the town of Gori in the Tiflis Governorate of the Russian Empire (today in Georgia). His father was Besarion Jughashvili, a cobbler, while his mother was Ketevan Geladze, a housemaid. As a child, Ioseb was plagued with numerous health issues. He was born with two adjoined toes on his left foot,[14] and his face was permanently scarred by smallpox at the age of 7. At age 12, he injured his left arm in an accident involving a horse-drawn carriage, rendering it shorter and stiffer than its counterpart.

Ioseb's father slid into alcoholism, which made him abusive to his family and caused his business to fail. When Ioseb's mother enrolled him into a Greek Orthodox priesthood school against her husband's wishes, Ioseb's enraged father went on a drunken rampage. He was banished from Gori after assaulting the police chief. Besarion moved to Tiflis, leaving his wife and son behind in Gori.

When Ioseb was sixteen, he received a scholarship to attend the Tiflis Spiritual Seminary, the leading Russian Orthodox seminary in Tiflis; the language of instruction was Russian. Despite being trained as a priest, he became an atheist in his first year.[15] He was a voracious reader and became a Georgian cultural nationalist. He anonymously published poetry in Georgian in the local press and engaged in student politics.[16] Although his performance had been good, he was expelled in 1899 after missing his final exams. The seminary's records also suggest that he was unable to pay his tuition fees.[17] Around this time, Ioseb discovered the writings of Vladimir Lenin and joined the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, a Marxist group from which the Bolsheviks would eventually emerge.

Out of school, Jughashvili briefly worked as a part-time clerk in a meteorological office, but after a state crackdown on revolutionaries, he went underground and became a full-time revolutionary, living off donations.

When Lenin formed the Bolsheviks in 1903, Jughashvili eagerly joined him. Jughashvili proved to be a very effective organizer of men as well as a capable intellectual. Among other activities, he wrote and distributed propaganda, organized strikes, and raised funds through bank robberies, kidnappings, extortion, and assassinations. Jughashvili was arrested and exiled to Siberia numerous times, but often escaped. His skill, charm, and street-smarts won him the respect of Lenin, and he rose rapidly through the ranks of the Bolsheviks.

Jughashvili married his first wife, Ekaterina Svanidze, in 1906, who bore him a son. She died the following year of typhus. In 1911, he met his future second wife, Nadezhda Alliluyeva, during one of his many exiles in Siberia.

Sometime between 1910 and 1912, he began using the alias "Stalin" in his writings.[citation needed]

Revolution and war
Main article: Joseph Stalin in the Russian Revolution, Russian Civil War, and Polish-Soviet War
World War I
During WWI, upon his exile in Siberia, Stalin was drafted into the Russian Army but his damaged left arm disqualified him for service. He had to travel to Achinsk, only 100 km from the Trans-Siberian Railway for his medical exam, and was allowed to stay there after the army rejected him.

Russian Revolution of 1917

Prior to the revolution of 1917, Stalin played an active role in fighting the Russian government. Here he is shown on a 1911 information card from the files of the Russian police in Saint Petersburg.[18]
After returning to Petrograd from his final exile, Stalin ousted Vyacheslav Molotov and Alexander Shlyapnikov as editors of Pravda. He then took a position in favor of supporting Alexander Kerensky's provisional government. However, after Lenin prevailed at the April 1917 Communist Party conference, Stalin and Pravda shifted to opposing the provisional government. At this conference, Stalin was elected to the Bolshevik Central Committee. In October 1917, the Bolshevik Central Committee voted in favor of an insurrection. On 7 November, from the Smolny Institute, Leon Trotsky, Lenin and the rest of the Central Committee coordinated the insurrection against Kerensky in the 1917 October Revolution. By 8 November, the Bolsheviks had stormed the Winter Palace and Kerensky's Cabinet had been arrested.

Russian Civil War, 1917C1919

A group of participants in the 8th Congress of the Russian Communist Party, 1919. In the middle are Stalin, Vladimir Lenin, and Mikhail Kalinin.

Joseph Stalin, Vladimir Lenin, and Mikhail Kalinin meeting in 1919. All three of them were "Old Bolsheviks"members of the Bolshevik party before the Russian Revolution of 1917.
Upon the October Revolution, Stalin was appointed People's Commissar for Nationalities' Affairs. Thereafter, civil war broke out in Russia, pitting Lenin's Red Army against the White Army, a loose alliance of anti-Bolshevik forces. Lenin formed a five-member Politburo, which included Stalin and Trotsky. In May 1918, Lenin dispatched Stalin to the city of Tsaritsyn. Through his new allies, Kliment Voroshilov and Semyon Budyonny, Stalin imposed his influence on the military.[19]

Stalin challenged many of the decisions of Trotsky, ordered the killings of many counter-revolutionaries and former Tsarist officers in the Red Army[19] and burned villages in order to intimidate the peasantry into submission and discourage bandit raids on food shipments.[20] In May 1919, in order to stem mass desertions on the Western front, Stalin had deserters and renegades publicly executed as traitors.[21]

PolishCSoviet War, 1919C21
Main article: PolishCSoviet War
As Bolshevik victories in the Russian Civil War of 1917C1922 established the Bolshevik position more securely, Soviet Russia started a push towards world revolution, which formed part of the communist ideology to transform the whole world into socialist states. (Tukhachevsky: There can be no doubt that if we had been victorious on the Vistula (i.e. in Poland), the revolutionary fires would have reached the entire continent.[22]). Looking toward Western Europe, the Bolsheviks encountered the newly reborn independent  and expansionist-minded  state of Poland. Conflicts began in what became known as the PolishCSoviet War of 1919C1921. After the Polish Army achieved initial successes, the Bolsheviks pushed the Polish forces back into central Poland in the summer of 1920. As the people's commissar to the high command of the southern front, Stalin was determined to take the then Polish city of Lww (now Lviv in Ukraine). This conflicted with the general strategy set by Lenin and Trotsky, which focused on the capture of Warsaw further north.

Tukhachevsky's forces engaged those of Polish commanders Jzef Pi?sudski and W?adys?aw Sikorski at the pivotal Battle of Warsaw (12C25 August 1920), but Stalin refused to redirect his troops from Lww to help Tukhachevsky. Consequently, the Poles totally routed the four invading armies of Soviet Russia fighting for the Polish capital. The Bolsheviks lost the battles for both Lww and Warsaw, and Stalin was blamed.[by whom?] In August 1920 Stalin returned to Moscow, where he defended himself and resigned his military command. At the Ninth Party Conference of MarchCApril 1920, on 22 September 1920, Trotsky openly criticized Stalin's behavior.[23]

Rise to power
Main article: Rise of Joseph Stalin
Stalin played a decisive role in the 1921 Red Army invasion of Georgia, after which he adopted particularly hardline, centralist policies towards Soviet Georgia. This led to the Georgian Affair of 1922 and other repressions.[24][25] Stalin's actions in Georgia created a rift with Lenin, who believed that all the Soviet states should stand equal.

Lenin nonetheless considered Stalin a loyal ally, and when he got mired in squabbles with Trotsky and other politicians, he decided to support Stalin. With the help of Lev Kamenev, Lenin appointed Stalin General Secretary in 1922.[26] This post enabled Stalin to appoint many of his allies to government positions.

Lenin suffered strokes in May and December 1922, forcing him into semi-retirement in Gorki. Stalin visited him often, acting as his intermediary with the outside world,[26] but the pair quarreled and their relationship deteriorated.[26] Lenin dictated increasingly disparaging notes on Stalin in what would become his testament. He criticized Stalin's political views, rude manners, and excessive power and ambition, and suggested that Stalin should be removed from the position of general secretary.[26] During Lenin's semi-retirement, Stalin forged an alliance with Kamenev and Grigory Zinoviev against Trotsky. These allies prevented Lenin's Testament from being revealed to the Twelfth Party Congress in April 1923[26] (after Lenin's death the testament was read to selected groups of deputies to the Thirteenth Party Congress in May 1924 but it was forbidden to be mentioned at the plenary assemblies or any documents of the Congress[27]).

Lenin died of a stroke on 21 January 1924. Following Lenin's death, a power struggle began, which involved the following seven Politburo members:[28] Nikolai Bukharin, Lev Kamenev, Alexei Rykov, Joseph Stalin, Mikhail Tomsky, Leon Trotsky, and Grigory Zinoviev.

Again, Kamenev and Zinoviev helped to keep Lenin's Testament from going public. Thereafter, Stalin's disputes with Kamenev and Zinoviev intensified. Trotsky, Kamenev and Zinoviev grew increasingly isolated, and were eventually ejected from the Central Committee and then from the Party itself.[26] Kamenev and Zinoviev were later readmitted, but Trotsky was exiled from the Soviet Union.

The Northern Expedition in China became a point of contention over foreign policy by Stalin and Trotsky. Stalin wanted the Communist Party of China to ally itself with the Nationalist Kuomintang, rather than attempt to implement a communist revolution. Trotsky urged the party to oppose the Kuomintang and launch a full-scale revolution. Stalin funded the KMT during the expedition.[29] Stalin countered Trotsky's criticisms by making a secret speech in which he said that the Kuomintang were the only ones capable of defeating the imperialists, that Chiang Kai-shek had funding from the rich merchants, and that his forces were to be utilized until squeezed for all usefulness like a lemon before being discarded.[30] However, Chiang quickly reversed the tables in the Shanghai massacre of 1927 by massacring the membership of the Communist party in Shanghai midway through the Northern Expedition.[31][32]

Stalin pushed for more rapid industrialization and central control of the economy, contravening Lenin's New Economic Policy (NEP). At the end of 1927, a critical shortfall in grain supplies prompted Stalin to push for the collectivisation of agriculture and order the seizure of grain hoards from kulak farmers.[26][33] Nikolai Bukharin and Premier Alexey Rykov opposed these policies and advocated a return to the NEP, but the rest of the Politburo sided with Stalin and removed Bukharin from the Politburo in November 1929. Rykov was fired the following year and was replaced by Vyacheslav Molotov on Stalin's recommendation.

In December 1934, the popular Communist Party boss in Leningrad, Sergei Kirov, was murdered. Stalin blamed Kirov's murder on a vast conspiracy of saboteurs and Trotskyites. He launched a massive purge against these internal enemies, putting them on rigged show trials and then having them executed or imprisoned in Siberian Gulags. Among these victims were old enemies, including Bukharin, Rykov, Kamenev and Zinoviev. Stalin made the loyal Nikolai Yezhov head of the secret police, the NKVD, and had him purge the NKVD of veteran Bolsheviks. With no serious opponents left in power, Stalin ended the purges in 1938. Yezhov was held to blame for the excesses of the Great Terror. He was dismissed from office and later executed.

Changes to Soviet society, 1927C1939
Bolstering Soviet secret service and intelligence
Main article: Chronology of Soviet secret police agencies
Part of a series on
Communism
Communist star.svg
Concepts[show]
Aspects[show]
Variants[show]
Internationals[show]
People[show]
By region[show]
Related topics[show]
 Communism portal
v t e
Part of the Politics series on
Stalinism
Joseph Stalin
Concepts[show]
Stalinist figures[show]
Parties[show]
Related topics[show]
Hammer and Sickle Red Star with Glow.png Communism Portal
Politics portal
v t e
Stalin vastly increased the scope and power of the state's secret police and intelligence agencies. Under his guiding hand, Soviet intelligence forces began to set up intelligence networks in most of the major nations of the world, including Germany (the famous Rote Kappelle spy ring), Great Britain, France, Japan, and the United States. Stalin made considerable use of the Communist International movement in order toinfiltrate agents[clarify] and to ensure that foreign Communist parties remained pro-Soviet and pro-Stalin.[citation needed]

One of the best examples of Stalin's ability to integrate secret police and foreign espionage came in 1940, when he gave approval to the secret police to have Leon Trotsky assassinated in Mexico.[34]

Cult of personality
Main article: Stalin's cult of personality
A cult of personality developed in the Soviet Union around both Stalin and Lenin. Many personality cults in history have been frequently measured and compared to his. Numerous towns, villages and cities were renamed after the Soviet leader (see List of places named after Stalin) and the Stalin Prize and Stalin Peace Prize were named in his honor. He accepted grandiloquent titles (e.g., "Coryphaeus of Science," "Father of Nations," "Brilliant Genius of Humanity," "Great Architect of Communism," "Gardener of Human Happiness," and others), and helped rewrite Soviet history to provide himself a more significant role in the revolution of 1917. At the same time, according to Nikita Khrushchev, he insisted that he be remembered for "the extraordinary modesty characteristic of truly great people."[35] Although statues of Stalin depict him at a height and build approximating the very tall Tsar Alexander III, sources suggest he was approximately 5 ft 4 in (163 cm).[36]

Trotsky criticized the cult of personality built around Stalin. It reached new levels during World War II, with Stalin's name included in the new Soviet national anthem. Stalin became the focus of literature, poetry, music, paintings and film that exhibited fawning devotion. He was sometimes credited with almost god-like qualities, including the suggestion that he single-handedly won the Second World War. The degree to which Stalin himself relished the cult surrounding him is debatable. The Finnish communist Arvo Tuominen records a sarcastic toast proposed by Stalin at a New Year's Party in 1935 in which he said "Comrades! I want to propose a toast to our Patriarch, life and sun, liberator of nations, architect of socialism [he rattled off all the appellations applied to him in those days] C Josef Vissarionovich Stalin, and I hope this is the first and last speech made to that genius this evening."[37]

In a 1956 speech, Nikita Khrushchev denounced Stalin's cult of personality with these words: "It is impermissible and foreign to the spirit of Marxism-Leninism to elevate one person, to transform him into a superman possessing supernatural characteristics akin to those of a god."[38] Khrushchev's speech and especially the confirmation reflected in the decisions of the 22nd Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in 1961 led to the destruction of thousands of Stalin monuments not only in the Soviet Union but in many other Socialist countries in the following years. In November 1961, for example, the large Stalin Statue on Berlin's monumental Stalinallee (promptly renamed Karl-Marx-Allee) was removed in a clandestine operation.

Purges and deportations
Purges and executions
Main article: Great Purge



Left: Beria's January 1940 letter to Stalin asking permission to execute 346 "enemies of the CPSU and of the Soviet authorities" who conducted "counter-revolutionary, right-Trotskyite plotting and spying activities"
Middle: Stalin's handwriting: "" (support).
Right: The Politburo's decision is signed by Stalin
Stalin, as head of the Politburo of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, consolidated near-absolute power in the 1930s with a Great Purge of the party that was justified as an attempt to expel "opportunists" and "counter-revolutionary infiltrators".[39][40] Those targeted by the purge were often expelled from the party, however more severe measures ranged from banishment to the Gulag labor camps to execution after trials held by NKVD troikas.[39][41][42]

In the 1930s, Stalin apparently became increasingly worried about the growing popularity of the Leningrad party boss Sergey Kirov. At the 1934 Party Congress where the vote for the new Central Committee was held, Kirov received only three negative votes, the fewest of any candidate, while Stalin received over one hundred negative votes.[43][44] After the assassination of Kirov, which may have been orchestrated by Stalin, Stalin invented a detailed scheme to implicate opposition leaders in the murder, including Trotsky, Kamenev and Zinoviev.[45] The investigations and trials expanded.[46] Stalin passed a new law on "terrorist organizations and terrorist acts" that were to be investigated for no more than ten days, with no prosecution, defense attorneys or appeals, followed by a sentence to be executed "quickly."[47]

Thereafter, several trials known as the Moscow Trials were held, but the procedures were replicated throughout the country. Article 58 of the legal code, which listed prohibited anti-Soviet activities as counterrevolutionary crime, was applied in the broadest manner.[48] The flimsiest pretexts were often enough to brand someone an "enemy of the people", starting the cycle of public persecution and abuse, often proceeding to interrogation, torture and deportation, if not death. The Russian word troika gained a new meaning: a quick, simplified trial by a committee of three subordinated to NKVDNKVD troikawith sentencing carried out within 24 hours.[47] Stalin's hand-picked executioner, Vasily Blokhin, was entrusted with carrying out some of the high-profile executions in this period.[49]



Nikolai Yezhov, walking with Stalin in the top photo from the 1930s, was killed in 1940. Following his execution, Yezhov was edited out of the photo by Soviet censors.[50] Such retouching was a common occurrence during Stalin's rule.
Many military leaders were convicted of treason and a large-scale purge of Red Army officers followed.[51][52] The repression of so many formerly high-ranking revolutionaries and party members led Leon Trotsky to claim that a "river of blood" separated Stalin's regime from that of Lenin.[53] In August 1940, Trotsky was assassinated in Mexico, where he had lived in exile since January 1937; this eliminated the last of Stalin's opponents among the former Party leadership.[54]

With the exception of Vladimir Milyutin (who died in prison in 1937) and Joseph Stalin himself, all of the members of Lenin's original cabinet who had not succumbed to death from natural causes before the purge were executed.

Mass operations of the NKVD also targeted "national contingents" (foreign ethnicities) such as Poles, ethnic Germans, Koreans, etc. A total of 350,000 (144,000 of them Poles) were arrested and 247,157 (110,000 Poles) were executed.[33] Many Americans who had emigrated to the Soviet Union during the worst of the Great Depression were executed; others were sent to prison camps or gulags.[55][56] Concurrent with the purges, efforts were made to rewrite the history in Soviet textbooks and other propaganda materials. Notable people executed by NKVD were removed from the texts and photographs as though they never existed. Gradually, the history of revolution was transformed to a story about just two key characters: Lenin and Stalin.

In light of revelations from Soviet archives, historians now estimate that nearly 700,000 people (353,074 in 1937 and 328,612 in 1938) were executed in the course of the terror,[57] with the great mass of victims merely "ordinary" Soviet citizens: workers, peasants, homemakers, teachers, priests, musicians, soldiers, pensioners, ballerinas, and beggars.[58][59] Many of the executed were interred in mass graves, with some of the major killing and burial sites being Bykivnia, Kurapaty and Butovo.[60]

Some Western experts believe the evidence released from the Soviet archives is understated, incomplete or unreliable.[61][62][63][64][65]

Stalin personally signed 357 proscription lists in 1937 and 1938 that condemned to execution some 40,000 people, and about 90% of these are confirmed to have been shot.[66] At the time, while reviewing one such list, Stalin reportedly muttered to no one in particular: "Who's going to remember all this riff-raff in ten or twenty years' time? No one. Who remembers the names now of the boyars Ivan the Terrible got rid of? No one."[67] In addition, Stalin dispatched a contingent of NKVD operatives to Mongolia, established a Mongolian version of the NKVD troika, and unleashed a bloody purge in which tens of thousands were executed as "Japanese Spies." Mongolian ruler Khorloogiin Choibalsan closely followed Stalin's lead.[68]

During the 1930s and 1940s, the Soviet leadership sent NKVD squads into other countries to murder defectors and other opponents of the Soviet regime. Victims of such plots included Yevhen Konovalets, Ignace Poretsky, Rudolf Klement, Alexander Kutepov, Evgeny Miller, Leon Trotsky and the Workers' Party of Marxist Unification (POUM) leadership in Catalonia (e.g. Andreu Nin).[69]

Deportations
Main article: Population transfer in the Soviet Union

1941 June deportation in Latvia
Shortly before, during and immediately after World War II, Stalin conducted a series of deportations on a huge scale that profoundly affected the ethnic map of the Soviet Union. It is estimated that between 1941 and 1949 nearly 3.3 million people [70][71] were deported to Siberia and the Central Asian republics. By some estimates up to 43% of the resettled population died of diseases and malnutrition.[72]

Separatism, resistance to Soviet rule and collaboration with the invading Germans were cited as the official reasons for the deportations, rightly or wrongly. Individual circumstances of those spending time in German-occupied territories were not examined. After the brief Nazi occupation of the Caucasus, the entire population of five of the small highland peoples and the Crimean Tatars C more than a million people in total C were deported without notice or any opportunity to take their possessions.[73]

As a result of Stalin's lack of trust in the loyalty of particular ethnicities, ethnic groups such as the Soviet Koreans, the Volga Germans, the Crimean Tatars, the Chechens, and many Poles were forcibly moved out of strategic areas and relocated to places in the central Soviet Union, especially Kazakhstan in Soviet Central Asia. By some estimates, hundreds of thousands of deportees may have died en route.[70]

According to official Soviet estimates, more than 14 million people passed through the Gulag from 1929 to 1953, with a further 7 to 8 million being deported and exiled to remote areas of the Soviet Union (including the entire nationalities in several cases).[74]

In February 1956, Nikita Khrushchev condemned the deportations as a violation of Leninism, and reversed some of them, although it was not until 1991 that the Tatars, Meskhetians and Volga Germans were allowed to return en masse to their homelands. The memory of the deportations has played a major part in the separatist movements in the Baltic States, Tatarstan and Chechnya.[75]

Collectivization
Main article: Collectivization in the Soviet Union

Children digging up frozen potatoes in the field of a collective farm, 1933
Stalin's regime moved to force collectivization of agriculture. This was intended to increase agricultural output from large-scale mechanized farms, to bring the peasantry under more direct political control, and to make tax collection more efficient. Collectivization brought social change on a scale not seen since the abolition of serfdom in 1861 and alienation from control of the land and its produce. Collectivization also meant a drastic drop in living standards for many peasants, and it faced violent reaction among the peasantry.

In the first years of collectivization it was estimated that industrial production would rise by 200% and agricultural production by 50%,[76] but these expectations were not realized. Stalin blamed this unanticipated failure on kulaks (rich peasants), who resisted collectivization. However, kulaks proper made up only 4% of the peasant population; the "kulaks" that Stalin targeted included the slightly better-off peasants who took the brunt of violence from the OGPU and the Komsomol. These peasants were about 60% of the population. Those officially defined as "kulaks", "kulak helpers", and, later, "ex-kulaks" were to be shot, placed into Gulag labor camps, or deported to remote areas of the country, depending on the charge. Archival data indicates that 20,201 people were executed during 1930, the year of Dekulakization.[68]

The two-stage progress of collectivizationinterrupted for a year by Stalin's famous editorials, "Dizzy with Success"[77] and "Reply to Collective Farm Comrades"[78]is a prime example of his capacity for tactical political withdrawal followed by intensification of initial strategies.

Famines
Main article: Soviet famine of 1932C1933

Famine in USSR, 1933. Areas of most disastrous famine marked with black.

Starved peasants on a street in Kharkiv, 1933.
Famine affected Ukraine, southern Russia and other parts of the USSR. The death toll from famine in the Soviet Union at this time is estimated at between 5 and 10 million people.[79] The worst crop failure of late tsarist Russia, in 1892, had caused 375,000 to 400,000 deaths.[80] Most modern scholars agree that the famine was caused by the policies of the government of the Soviet Union under Stalin, rather than by natural reasons.[81] According to Alan Bullock, "the total Soviet grain crop was no worse than that of 1931 ... it was not a crop failure but the excessive demands of the state, ruthlessly enforced, that cost the lives of as many as five million Ukrainian peasants." Stalin refused to release large grain reserves that could have alleviated the famine, while continuing to export grain; he was convinced that the Ukrainian peasants had hidden grain away and strictly enforced draconian new collective-farm theft laws in response.[82][83] Other historians hold it was largely the insufficient harvests of 1931 and 1932 caused by a variety of natural disasters that resulted in famine, with the successful harvest of 1933 ending the famine.[84] Soviet and other historians have argued that the rapid collectivization of agriculture was necessary in order to achieve an equally rapid industrialization of the Soviet Union and ultimately win World War II. Alec Nove claims that the Soviet Union industrialized in spite of, rather than because of, its collectivized agriculture.[citation needed]

The USSR also experienced a major famine in 1947 as a result of war damage and severe droughts, but economist Michael Ellman argues that it could have been prevented if the government had not mismanaged its grain reserves. The famine cost an estimated 1 to 1.5 million lives as well as secondary population losses due to reduced fertility.[85]

Ukrainian famine
Main article: Holodomor
The Holodomor famine is sometimes referred to as the Ukrainian Genocide, implying it was engineered by the Soviet government, specifically targeting the Ukrainian people to destroy the Ukrainian nation as a political factor and social entity.[86][87][88][89] While historians continue to disagree whether the policies that led to Holodomor fall under the legal definition of genocide, twenty-six countries have officially recognized the Holodomor as such. On 28 November 2006, the Ukrainian Parliament approved a bill declaring the Soviet-era forced famine an act of genocide against the Ukrainian people.[90] Professor Michael Ellman concludes that Ukrainians were victims of genocide in 1932C33 according to a more relaxed definition that is favored by some specialists in the field of genocide studies. He asserts that Soviet policies greatly exacerbated the famine's death toll. Although 1.8 million tonnes of grain were exported during the height of the starvation  enough to feed 5 million people for one year  the use of torture and execution to extract grain under the Law of Spikelets, the use of force to prevent starving peasants from fleeing the worst-affected areas, and the refusal to import grain or secure international humanitarian aid to alleviate conditions led to incalculable human suffering in the Ukraine. It would appear that Stalin intended to use the starvation as a cheap and efficient means (as opposed to deportations and shootings) to kill off those deemed to be "counterrevolutionaries," "idlers," and "thieves," but not to annihilate the Ukrainian peasantry as a whole. Ellman also claims that, while this was not the only Soviet genocide (e.g., the Polish operation of the NKVD), it was the worst in terms of mass casualties.[66]

Current estimates on the total number of casualties within Soviet Ukraine range mostly from 2.2 million[91][92] to 4 to 5 million.[93][94][95]

A Ukrainian court found Josef Stalin, Lazar Kaganovich, Stanislav Kosior and other leaders of the former Soviet Union guilty of genocide by "organizing mass famine in Ukraine in 1932C1933" in January 2010. However, the court "dropped criminal proceedings over the suspects' deaths".[96][97]

Industrialization
The Russian Civil War and wartime communism had a devastating effect on the country's economy. Industrial output in 1922 was 13% of that in 1914. A recovery followed under the New Economic Policy, which allowed a degree of market flexibility within the context of socialism. Under Stalin's direction, this was replaced by a system of centrally ordained "Five-Year Plans" in the late 1920s. These called for a highly ambitious program of state-guided crash industrialization and the collectivization of agriculture.


Stalin on building of Moscow-Volga canal. It was constructed from 1932 to 1937 by Gulag prisoners.
With seed capital unavailable because of international reaction to Communist policies, little international trade, and virtually no modern infrastructure, Stalin's government financed industrialization both by restraining consumption on the part of ordinary Soviet citizens to ensure that capital went for re-investment into industry and by ruthless extraction of wealth from the kulaks.

In 1933 workers' real earnings sank to about one-tenth of the 1926 level.[citation needed] Common and political prisoners in labor camps were forced to perform unpaid labor, and communists and Komsomol members were frequently "mobilized" for various construction projects. The Soviet Union used numerous foreign experts to design new factories, supervise construction, instruct workers, and improve manufacturing processes. The most notable foreign contractor was Albert Kahn's firm that designed and built 521 factories between 1930 and 1932. As a rule, factories were supplied with imported equipment.

In spite of early breakdowns and failures, the first two Five-Year Plans achieved rapid industrialization from a very low economic base. While it is generally agreed that the Soviet Union achieved significant levels of economic growth under Stalin, the precise rate of growth is disputed. It is not disputed, however, that these gains were accomplished at the cost of millions of lives. Official Soviet estimates stated the annual rate of growth at 13.9%; Russian and Western estimates gave lower figures of 5.8% and even 2.9%. Indeed, one estimate is that Soviet growth became temporarily much higher after Stalin's death.[98][99]

According to Robert Lewis, the Five-Year Plan substantially helped to modernize the previously backward Soviet economy. New products were developed, and the scale and efficiency of existing production greatly increased. Some innovations were based on indigenous technical developments, others on imported foreign technology.[100] Despite its costs, the industrialization effort allowed the Soviet Union to fight, and ultimately win, World War II.

Science
Main articles: Science and technology in the Soviet Union and Suppressed research in the Soviet Union
Science in the Soviet Union was under strict ideological control by Stalin and his government, along with art and literature. There was significant progress in "ideologically safe" domains, owing to the free Soviet education system and state-financed research. However, the most notable legacy during Stalin's time was his public endorsement of the agronomist Trofim Lysenko, who rejected Mendelian genetics as "bourgeois pseudoscience" and instead advocated Lamarckian inheritance and hybridization theories (which had been discredited by most Western countries by the 1920s in favor of Darwinian Evolution), that caused widespread agricultural destruction and major setbacks in Soviet knowledge in biology. Many scientists came out publicly against his views, but the majority of them, including Nikolai Vavilov (who was later hailed as a pioneer in modern genetics), were imprisoned or executed. Some areas of physics were criticized.[101][102]

Social services
Under the Soviet government people benefited from some social liberalization. Girls were given an adequate, equal education and women had equal rights in employment,[33] improving lives for women and families. Stalinist development also contributed to advances in health care, which significantly increased the lifespan and quality of life of the typical Soviet citizen.[33] Stalin's policies granted the Soviet people universal access to healthcare and education, effectively creating the first generation free from the fear of typhus, cholera, and malaria.[33] The occurrences of these diseases dropped to record low numbers, increasing life spans by decades.[33]

Soviet women under Stalin were the first generation of women in the country able to give birth in the safety of a hospital with access to prenatal care.[33] Education was also an example of an increase in the standard of living after economic development. The generation born during Stalin's rule was the first in the USSR to achieve widespread literacy.[103] Engineers were sent abroad to learn industrial technology, and hundreds of foreign engineers were brought to Russia on contract.[33] Transport links were improved and many new railways built. Workers who exceeded their quotas, Stakhanovites, received many incentives for their work;[103] they could afford to buy the goods that were mass-produced by the rapidly expanding Soviet economy.

The increase in demand due to industrialization and the decrease in the workforce due to World War II and repressions generated a major expansion in job opportunities for the survivors, especially for women.[103]

Culture
Main article: Socialist Realism

Stalin depicted in the style of Socialist Realism. Painting by Isaak Brodsky
Although Stalin was Georgian by birth, after he became involved in politics he promoted Russian nationalism[104] and significantly promoted Russian history, language, and Russian national heroes, particularly during the 1930s and 1940s.[citation needed] There are also claims that he held the Russian people up as the elder brothers of the non-Russian minorities.[105]

During Stalin's reign, the official and long-lived style of Socialist Realism was established for painting, sculpture, music, drama and literature. Previously fashionable "revolutionary" expressionism, abstract art, and avant-garde experimentation were discouraged or denounced as "formalism".

The degree of Stalin's personal involvement in general, and in specific instances, has been the subject of discussion. Stalin's favorite novel Pharaoh,[106] by Polish writer Boles?aw Prus, shared similarities with Sergei Eisenstein's film, Ivan the Terrible, produced under Stalin's tutelage.

In architecture, a Stalinist Empire Style (basically, updated neoclassicism on a very large scale, exemplified by the Seven Sisters of Moscow) replaced the constructivism of the 1920s. Stalin's rule had a largely disruptive effect on indigenous cultures within the Soviet Union, though the politics of Korenizatsiya and forced development were possibly beneficial to the integration of later generations of indigenous cultures.

Religion
Main article: Religion in the Soviet Union

Photograph taken of the 1931 demolition of the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour in Moscow.
Raised in the Georgian Orthodox faith, Stalin later denounced religion and became an atheist. His government promoted atheism through special atheistic education in schools, anti-religious propaganda, the anti-religious work of public institutions (Society of the Godless), discriminatory laws, and a terror campaign against religious believers. By the late 1930s, it had become dangerous to be publicly associated with religion.[107]

Stalin's role in the fortunes of the Russian Orthodox Church is complex. Continuous persecution in the 1930s resulted in its near-extinction as a public institution: by 1939, active parishes numbered in the low hundreds (down from 54,000 in 1917), many churches had been leveled, and tens of thousands of priests, monks and nuns were persecuted and killed. Over 100,000 were shot during the purges of 1937C1938.[108][109] During World War II, the Church was allowed a revival as a patriotic organization, and thousands of parishes were reactivated until a further round of suppression during Khrushchev's rule. The Russian Orthodox Church Synod's recognition of the Soviet government and of Stalin personally led to a schism with the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia.

All other religions in the Soviet Union, including the Roman Catholic Church, Eastern Catholic Churches, Baptists, Islam, Buddhism, and Judaism underwent similar ordeals: thousands of monks were persecuted, and hundreds of churches, synagogues, mosques, temples, sacred monuments, monasteries and other religious buildings were razed.

Theorist
Main article: Stalinism
Stalin and his supporters have highlighted the notion that socialism can be built and consolidated by a country ("Socialism in One Country") as underdeveloped as Russia during the 1920s. Indeed, this might be the only means in which it could be built in a hostile environment.[110] In 1933, Stalin put forward the theory of aggravation of the class struggle along with the development of socialism, arguing that the further the country would move forward, the more acute forms of struggle will be used by the doomed remnants of exploiter classes in their last desperate efforts C and that, therefore, political repression was necessary.

In 1936, Stalin announced that the society of the Soviet Union consisted of two non-antagonistic classes: workers and kolkhoz peasantry. These corresponded to the two different forms of property over the means of production that existed in the Soviet Union: state property (for the workers) and collective property (for the peasantry). In addition to these, Stalin distinguished the stratum of intelligentsia. The concept of "non-antagonistic classes" was entirely new to Leninist theory. Among Stalin's contributions to Communist theoretical literature were "Dialectical and Historical Materialism," "Marxism and the National Question", "Trotskyism or Leninism", and "The Principles of Leninism."

Calculating the number of victims

Photo from 1943 exhumation of mass grave of Polish officers killed by NKVD in Katy Forest in 1940.
Before the 1991 dissolution of the Soviet Union, researchers who attempted to count the number of people killed under Stalin's regime produced estimates ranging from 3 to 60 million.[111] After the Soviet Union dissolved, evidence from the Soviet archives also became available, containing official records of 799,455 executions (1921C1953),[112] around 1.7 million deaths in the Gulag and some 390,000 deaths during kulak forced resettlement C with a total of about 2.9 million officially recorded victims in these categories.[113]

The official Soviet archival records do not contain comprehensive figures for some categories of victims, such as those of ethnic deportations or of German population transfers in the aftermath of World War II.[114] Eric D. Weitz wrote, "By 1948, according to Nicolas Werth, the mortality rate of the 600,000 people deported from the Caucasus between 1943 and 1944 had reached 25%."[115][116] Other notable exclusions from NKVD data on repression deaths include the Katyn massacre, other killings in the newly occupied areas, and the mass shootings of Red Army personnel (deserters and so-called deserters) in 1941. The Soviets executed 158,000 soldiers for desertion during the war,[117] and the "blocking detachments" of the NKVD shot thousands more.[118] Also, the official statistics on Gulag mortality exclude deaths of prisoners taking place shortly after their release but which resulted from the harsh treatment in the camps.[119] Some historians also believe that the official archival figures of the categories that were recorded by Soviet authorities are unreliable and incomplete.[120][121] In addition to failures regarding comprehensive recordings, as one additional example, Robert Gellately and Simon Sebag Montefiore argue that the many suspects beaten and tortured to death while in "investigative custody" were likely not to have been counted amongst the executed.[33][122]

Historians working after the Soviet Union's dissolution have estimated victim totals ranging from approximately 4 million to nearly 10 million, not including those who died in famines.[123][124][125] Russian writer Vadim Erlikman, for example, makes the following estimates: executions, 1.5 million; gulags, 5 million; deportations, 1.7 million out of 7.5 million deported; and POWs and German civilians, 1 million C a total of about 9 million victims of repression.[126]

Some have also included the deaths of 6 to 8 million people in the 1932C1933 famine among the victims of Stalin's repression. This categorization is controversial however, as historians differ as to whether the famine was a deliberate part of the campaign of repression against kulaks and others,[66][127][128][129][130] or simply an unintended consequence of the struggle over forced collectivization.[83][131][132]

Accordingly, if famine victims are included, a minimum of around 10 million deaths6 million from famine and 4 million from other causesare attributable to the regime,[133] with a number of recent historians suggesting a likely total of around 20 million, citing much higher victim totals from executions, Gulag camps, deportations and other causes.[134][135][136][137][138][139][140] Adding 6C8 million famine victims to Erlikman's estimates above, for example, would yield a total of between 15 and 17 million victims. Researcher Robert Conquest, meanwhile, has revised his original estimate of up to 30 million victims down to 20 million.[141] In his most recent edition of The Great Terror (2007), Conquest states that while exact numbers may never be known with complete certainty, at least 15 million people were either executed or worked to death in the camps.[142] RJ Rummel maintains that the earlier higher victim total estimates are correct, although he includes those killed by the Soviet government in other Eastern European countries as well.[143][144]

World War II, 1939C45
Main article: Soviet Union in World War II

Ribbentrop and Stalin in Kremlin
Pact with Hitler
After a failed attempt to sign an anti-German military alliance with France and Britain[145][146][147] and talks with Germany regarding a potential political deal,[148][149][150][151] on 23 August 1939, the Soviet Union entered into a non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany, negotiated by Soviet foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov and German foreign minister Joachim von Ribbentrop.[152] Officially a non-aggression treaty only, an appended secret protocol, also reached on 23 August 1939, divided the whole of eastern Europe into German and Soviet spheres of influence.[153][154]

The eastern part of Poland, Latvia, Estonia, Finland and part of Romania were recognized as parts of the Soviet sphere of influence,[154] with Lithuania added in a second secret protocol in September 1939.[155] Stalin and Ribbentrop traded toasts on the night of the signing discussing past hostilities between the countries.[156] German-Soviet trade agreements completely undermined the British blockade of Germany.[157] Economic cooperation was so considerable that in 1939 Trotsky called Stalin "Hitler's quartermaster".[158]

Implementing the division of Eastern Europe and other invasions
On 1 September 1939, the German invasion of its agreed upon portion of Poland started World War II.[152] On 17 September the Red Army invaded eastern Poland and occupied the Polish territory assigned to it by the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, followed by co-ordination with German forces in Poland.[159][160] Eleven days later, the secret protocol of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact was modified, allotting Germany a larger part of Poland, while ceding most of Lithuania to the Soviet Union.[161]


Planned and actual territorial changes in Eastern and Central Europe 1939C1940 (click to enlarge)
After Stalin declared that he was going to "solve the Baltic problem", by June 1940, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia were merged into the Soviet Union, after repressions and actions therein brought about the deaths of over 160,000 citizens of these states.[162][163][164] After facing stiff resistance in an invasion of Finland,[165] an interim peace was entered, granting the Soviet Union the eastern region of Karelia (10% of Finnish territory).[165]

After this campaign, Stalin took actions to bolster the Soviet military, modify training and improve propaganda efforts in the Soviet military.[166] In June 1940, Stalin directed the Soviet annexation of Bessarabia and northern Bukovina, proclaiming this formerly Romanian territory part of the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic. But in annexing northern Bukovina, Stalin had gone beyond the agreed limits of the secret protocol.[167]


Stalin and Molotov at the signing of the SovietCJapanese Neutrality Pact with the Empire of Japan, 1941
After the Tripartite Pact was signed by Axis Powers Germany, Japan and Italy, in October 1940, Stalin traded letters with Ribbentrop, with Stalin writing about entering an agreement regarding a "permanent basis" for their "mutual interests."[168] After a conference in Berlin between Hitler, Molotov and Ribbentrop, Germany presented Molotov with a proposed written agreement for Axis entry.[169] On 25 November, Stalin responded with a proposed written agreement for Axis entry which was never answered by Germany. Shortly thereafter, Hitler issued a secret directive on the eventual attempts to invade the Soviet Union.[170] In an effort to demonstrate peaceful intentions toward Germany, on 13 April 1941, Stalin oversaw the signing of a neutrality pact with Axis power Japan.[171]

On 6 May, Stalin replaced Molotov as Premier of the Soviet Union. Although Stalin had been the de facto head of government for a decade and a half, he had concluded relations with Nazi Germany had deteriorated to such an extent that he needed to deal with the problem as de jure head of government as well.[172]

Hitler breaks the pact
In the early morning of 22 June 1941, Adolf Hitler broke the pact by implementing Operation Barbarossa, the German invasion of the Soviet Union that began the war on the Eastern Front.[173] Already in autumn 1940 Stalin received a warning from the Dutch Communist Party, via the network of the Red Orchestra, that Hitler was preparing for a winter war by allowing the construction of thousands of snow landing gears for the Junkers Ju 52 transport planes.[174] Although Stalin had received warnings from spies and his generals,[175][176][177][178][179] he felt that Germany would not attack the Soviet Union until Germany had defeated Britain.[175] In the initial hours after the German attack commenced, Stalin hesitated, wanting to ensure that the German attack was sanctioned by Hitler, rather than the unauthorized action of a rogue general.[33]

Accounts by Nikita Khrushchev and Anastas Mikoyan claim that, after the invasion, Stalin retreated to his dacha in despair for several days and did not participate in leadership decisions.[180] However, documentary evidence of orders given by Stalin contradicts these accounts, leading some historians to speculate that Khrushchev's account is inaccurate.[181] By the end of 1941, the Soviet military had suffered 4.3 million casualties[182] and German forces had advanced 1,050 miles (1,690 kilometers).[183]

Soviets stop the Germans

With all the men at the front, Moscow women dig anti-tank trenches around Moscow in 1941.
While the Germans pressed forward, Stalin was confident of an eventual Allied victory over Germany. In September 1941, Stalin told British diplomats that he wanted two agreements: (1) a mutual assistance/aid pact and (2) a recognition that, after the war, the Soviet Union would gain the territories in countries that it had taken pursuant to its division of Eastern Europe with Hitler in the MolotovCRibbentrop Pact. The British agreed to assistance but refused to agree upon the territorial gains, which Stalin accepted months later as the military situation deteriorated somewhat in mid-1942.[184] By December 1941, Hitler's troops had advanced to within 20 miles of the Kremlin in Moscow. On 5 December, the Soviets launched a counteroffensive, pushing German troops back 40C50 miles from Moscow, the Wehrmacht's first significant defeat of the war.[185]

In 1942, Hitler shifted his primary goal from an immediate victory in the East, to the more long-term goal of securing the southern Soviet Union to conquer oil fields vital to a long-term German war effort.[186] In July 1942, Hitler praised the efficiency of the Soviet military industry and Stalin:

Stalin, too, must command our unconditional respect. In his own way he is one hell of a fellow! (German: ein genialer Kerl) He knows his models, Genghiz Khan and the others, very well, and the scope of his industrial planning is exceeded only by our own Four Year Plan.[187]

While Red Army generals saw evidence that Hitler would shift efforts south, Stalin considered this to be a flanking campaign in efforts to take Moscow.[188] During the war, Time magazine named Stalin Time Person of the Year twice[189] and he was also one of the nominees for Time Person of the Century title.[citation needed]

Soviet push to Germany

The center of Stalingrad after liberation, 2 February 1943.
The Soviets repulsed the important German strategic southern campaign and, although there were 2.5 million Soviet casualties in that effort, it permitted the Soviets to take the offensive for most of the rest of the war on the Eastern Front.[190]


The Big Three: Stalin, U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt, and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill at the Tehran Conference, November 1943.
Germany attempted an encirclement attack at Kursk, which was successfully repulsed by the Soviets.[191] Kursk marked the beginning of a period where Stalin became more willing to listen to the advice of his generals. By the end of 1943, the Soviets occupied half of the territory taken by the Germans from 1941 to 1942.[192] Soviet military industrial output also had increased substantially from late 1941 to early 1943 after Stalin had moved factories well to the East of the front, safe from German invasion and air attack.[193]

In November 1943, Stalin met with Churchill and Roosevelt in Tehran.[194] The parties later agreed that Britain and America would launch a cross-channel invasion of France in May 1944, along with a separate invasion of southern France.[195] Stalin insisted that, after the war, the Soviet Union should incorporate the portions of Poland it occupied pursuant to the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact with Germany, which Churchill opposed.[196]

In 1944, the Soviet Union made significant advances across Eastern Europe toward Germany,[197] including Operation Bagration, a massive offensive in Belorussia against the German Army Group Centre.[198]

Final victory

Victorious Soviet soldiers in Berlin, 1945.
By April 1945, Nazi Germany faced its last days with 1.9 million German soldiers in the East fighting 6.4 million Red Army soldiers while 1 million German soldiers in the West battled 4 million Western Allied soldiers.[199] While initial talk existed of a race to Berlin by the Allies, after Stalin successfully lobbied for Eastern Germany to fall within the Soviet "sphere of influence" at Yalta, no plans were made by the Western Allies to seize the city by a ground operation.[200][201]

On 30 April, Hitler and Eva Braun committed suicide, after which Soviet forces found their remains, which had been burned at Hitler's directive.[202] German forces surrendered a few days later. Despite the Soviets' possession of Hitler's remains, Stalin refused to believe that his old nemesis was actually dead, a belief that remained with him for years after the war ended.[203][204]

Fending off the German invasion and pressing to victory in the East required a tremendous sacrifice by the Soviet Union.[205] Soviet military casualties totaled approximately 35 million (official figures 28.2 million) with approximately 14.7 million killed, missing or captured (official figures 11.285 million).[206] Although figures vary, the Soviet civilian death toll probably reached 20 million.[206] One in four Soviets was killed or wounded.[207] Some 1,710 towns and 70,000 villages were destroyed.[208][209] Thereafter, Stalin was at times referred to as one of the most influential men in human history.[210][211]

Nobel Peace Prize nominations
Stalin was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1945 and 1948.[212]

Human rights abuses

Part of 5 March 1940 memo from Lavrentiy Beria to Stalin proposing execution of Polish officers
After taking around 300,000 Polish prisoners in 1939 and early 1940,[213][214][215][216] 25,700 Polish POWs were executed on 5 March 1940, pursuant to a note to Stalin from Lavrenty Beria,[217][218] in what became known as the Katyn massacre.[217][219][220] While Stalin personally told a Polish general they'd "lost track" of the officers in Manchuria,[221][222][223] Polish railroad workers found the mass grave after the 1941 Nazi invasion.[224] The massacre became a source of political controversy,[225][226] with the Soviets eventually claiming that Germany committed the executions when the Soviet Union retook Poland in 1944.[217][227] The Soviets did not admit responsibility until 1990.[228]

Stalin introduced controversial military orders, such as Order No. 270 in August 1941, requiring superiors to shoot deserters on the spot[229] while their family members were subject to arrest. Thereafter, Stalin also conducted a purge of several military commanders that were shot for "cowardice" without a trial.[118] Stalin issued Order No. 227 in July 1942, directing that commanders permitting retreat without permission to be subject to a military tribunal, and soldiers guilty of disciplinary procedures to be forced into "penal battalions", which were sent to the most dangerous sections of the front lines.[230] From 1942 to 1945, 427,910 soldiers were assigned to penal battalions.[231] The order also directed "blocking detachments" to shoot fleeing panicked troops at the rear.[230]

In June 1941, weeks after the German invasion began, Stalin also directed employing a scorched earth policy of destroying the infrastructure and food supplies of areas before the Germans could seize them, and that partisans were to be set up in evacuated areas.[181] He also ordered the NKVD to murder around one hundred thousand political prisoners in areas where the Wehrmacht approached,[232] while others were deported east.[120][233][234]


Beria's proposal from 29 January 1942 to execute 46 Soviet generals. Stalin's resolution: "Shoot all named in the list. C J. St."
After the capture of Berlin, Soviet troops reportedly raped from tens of thousands to two million women,[235] and 50,000 during and after the occupation of Budapest.[236][237] Many of these women died or committed suicide as a result of rape. In former Axis countries, such as Germany, Romania and Hungary, Red Army officers generally viewed cities, villages and farms as being open to pillaging and looting.[238]

In the Soviet Occupation Zone of post-war Germany, the Soviets set up ten NKVD-run "special camps" subordinate to the gulag.[239] These "special camps" were former Stalags, prisons, or Nazi concentration camps such as Sachsenhausen (special camp number 7) and Buchenwald (special camp number 2).[240] According to German government estimates, "65,000 people died in those Soviet-run camps or in transportation to them."[241]

According to recent figures, of an estimated four million POWs taken by the Soviets, including Germans, Japanese, Hungarians, Romanians and others, some 580,000 never returned, presumably victims of privation or the Gulags.[242] German estimates put the actual death toll of German POWs in the USSR at about 1 million, they maintain that among those reported as missing were men who actually died as POWs.[243] Soviet POWs and forced laborers who survived German captivity were sent to special "transit" or "filtration" camps to determine which were potential traitors.[244]

Of the approximately 4 million to be repatriated 2,660,013 were civilians and 1,539,475 were former POWs. Of the total, 2,427,906 were sent home and 801,152 were reconscripted into the armed forces. 608,095 were enrolled in the work battalions of the defense ministry. 272,867 were transferred to the authority of the NKVD for punishment, which meant a transfer to the Gulag system.[244][245][246] 89,468 remained in the transit camps as reception personnel until the repatriation process was finally wound up in the early 1950s.[244]

Allied conferences on post-war Europe

The Big Three: British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Stalin at the Yalta Conference, February 1945.
Stalin met in several conferences with British Prime Minister Winston Churchill (and later Clement Attlee) and/or U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt (and later Harry Truman) to plan military strategy and, later, to discuss Europe's postwar reorganization. Very early conferences, such as that with British diplomats in Moscow in 1941 and with Churchill and American diplomats in Moscow in 1942, focused mostly upon war planning and supply, though some preliminary postwar reorganization discussion also occurred. In 1943, Stalin met with Churchill and Roosevelt in the Tehran Conference. In 1944, Stalin met with Churchill in the Moscow Conference. Beginning in late 1944, the Red Army occupied much of Eastern Europe during these conferences and the discussions shifted to a more intense focus on the reorganization of postwar Europe.

In February 1945, at the conference at Yalta, Stalin demanded a Soviet sphere of political influence in Eastern Europe. Stalin eventually was convinced by Churchill and Roosevelt not to dismember Germany. Stalin also stated that the Polish government-in-exile demands for self-rule were not negotiable, such that the Soviet Union would keep the territory of eastern Poland they had already taken by invasion with German consent in 1939, and wanted the pro-Soviet Polish government installed. After resistance by Churchill and Roosevelt, Stalin promised a re-organization of the current Communist puppet government on a broader democratic basis in Poland.[247] He stated the new government's primary task would be to prepare elections.[248]

The parties at Yalta further agreed that the countries of liberated Europe and former Axis satellites would be allowed to "create democratic institutions of their own choice", pursuant to "the right of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they will live."[249] The parties also agreed to help those countries form interim governments "pledged to the earliest possible establishment through free elections" and "facilitate where necessary the holding of such elections."[249] After the re-organization of the Provisional Government of the Republic of Poland, the parties agreed that the new party shall "be pledged to the holding of free and unfettered elections as soon as possible on the basis of universal suffrage and secret ballot."[249] One month after Yalta, the Soviet NKVD arrested 16 Polish leaders wishing to participate in provisional government negotiations, for alleged "crimes" and "diversions", which drew protest from the West.[248] The fraudulent Polish elections, held in January 1947 resulted in Poland's official transformation to undemocratic communist state by 1949.


British Prime Minister Clement Attlee, U.S. President Harry S. Truman and Joseph Stalin at the Potsdam Conference, July 1945.
At the Potsdam Conference from July to August 1945, though Germany had surrendered months earlier, instead of withdrawing Soviet forces from Eastern European countries, Stalin had not moved those forces. At the beginning of the conference, Stalin repeated previous promises to Churchill that he would refrain from a "Sovietization" of Eastern Europe.[250] Stalin pushed for reparations from Germany without regard to the base minimum supply for German citizens' survival, which worried Truman and Churchill who thought that Germany would become a financial burden for Western powers.[251]

In addition to reparations, Stalin pushed for "war booty", which would permit the Soviet Union to directly seize property from conquered nations without quantitative or qualitative limitation, and a clause was added permitting this to occur with some limitations.[251] By July 1945, Stalin's troops effectively controlled the Baltic States, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Romania, and refugees were fleeing out of these countries fearing a Communist take-over. The western allies, and especially Churchill, were suspicious of the motives of Stalin, who had already installed communist governments in the central European countries under his influence.

In these conferences, his first appearances on the world stage, Stalin proved to be a formidable negotiator. Anthony Eden, the British Foreign Secretary noted: "Marshal Stalin as a negotiator was the toughest proposition of all. Indeed, after something like thirty years' experience of international conferences of one kind and another, if I had to pick a team for going into a conference room, Stalin would be my first choice. Of course the man was ruthless and of course he knew his purpose. He never wasted a word. He never stormed, he was seldom even irritated."[252]

War against Japan
At the Tehran and Yalta conferences, Stalin agreed to enter the war against Japan after Germany's defeat. On 5 April 1945, the Soviet Government officially denounced the SovietCJapanese Neutrality Pact and on 8 August declared war. The next day, in-between the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the Soviet army invaded Japanese occupied Manchuria and quickly defeated the Kwantung Army. These events led to the Japanese surrender and the complete end of World War II. The Soviets annexed Sakhalin Island and the Kuril Islands, which were promised to them in the agreements, and Stalin had planned to invade the Japanese island of Hokkaido but cancelled the operation after strong American protest. Stalin felt dismayed in not being given much influence in occupied Japan.[253]

Post-war era, 1945C1953
The Iron Curtain and the Eastern Bloc
After Soviet forces remained in Eastern and Central European countries, with the beginnings of communist puppet regimes in those countries, Churchill referred to the region as being behind an "Iron Curtain" of control from Moscow.[254][255] The countries under Soviet control in Eastern and Central Europe were sometimes called the "Eastern bloc" or "Soviet Bloc".


The Eastern Bloc until 1989
In Soviet-controlled East Germany, the major task of the ruling communist party in Germany was to channel Soviet orders down to both the administrative apparatus and the other bloc parties pretending that these were initiatives of its own, with deviations potentially leading to reprimands, imprisonment, torture and even death. Property and industry were nationalized.[256]

The German Democratic Republic was declared on 7 October 1949, with a new constitution which enshrined socialism and gave the Soviet-controlled Socialist Unity Party (SED) control. In Berlin, after citizens strongly rejected communist candidates in an election, in June 1948, the Soviet Union blockaded West Berlin, the portion of Berlin not under Soviet control, cutting off all supply of food and other items. The blockade failed due to the unexpected massive aerial resupply campaign carried out by the Western powers known as the Berlin Airlift. In 1949, Stalin conceded defeat and ended the blockade.

While Stalin had promised at the Yalta Conference that free elections would be held in Poland,[249] after an election failure in "3 times YES" elections,[257] vote rigging was employed to win a majority in the carefully controlled poll.[258][259][260] Following the forged referendum, the Polish economy started to become nationalized.[261]

In Hungary, when the Soviets installed a communist government, Mtys Rkosi, who described himself as "Stalin's best Hungarian disciple"[262] and "Stalin's best pupil",[263] took power. Rkosi employed "salami tactics", slicing up these enemies like pieces of salami,[264] to battle the initial postwar political majority ready to establish a democracy.[265] Rkosi, employed Stalinist political and economic programs, and was dubbed the "bald murderer" for establishing one of the harshest dictatorships in Europe.[265][266] Approximately 350,000 Hungarian officials and intellectuals were purged from 1948 to 1956.[265]

During World War II, in Bulgaria, the Red Army crossed the border and created the conditions for a communist coup d'tat on the following night. The Soviet military commander in Sofia assumed supreme authority, and the communists whom he instructed, including Kimon Georgiev, took full control of domestic politics.[267]

In 1949, the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Romania founded the Comecon in accordance with Stalin's desire to enforce Soviet domination of the lesser states of Central Europe and to mollify some states that had expressed interest in the Marshall Plan,[268] and which were now, increasingly, cut off from their traditional markets and suppliers in Western Europe.[269] Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Poland had remained interested in Marshall aid despite the requirements for a convertible currency and market economies. In July 1947, Stalin ordered these communist-dominated governments to pull out of the Paris Conference on the European Recovery Programme. This has been described as "the moment of truth" in the postCWorld War II division of Europe.[269]

In Greece, Britain and the United States supported the anti-communists in the Greek Civil War and suspected the Soviets of supporting the Greek communists, although Stalin refrained from getting involved in Greece, dismissing the movement as premature. Albania remained an ally of the Soviet Union, but Yugoslavia broke with the USSR in 1948.

In Stalin's last year of life, one of his last major foreign policy initiatives was the 1952 Stalin Note for German reunification and Superpower disengagement from Central Europe, but Britain, France, and the United States viewed this with suspicion and rejected the offer.

Asia

Stalin and Mao Zedong on a Chinese postage stamp.
In Asia, in addition to overrunning Manchuria, the Soviets had taken Korea from the Japanese and occupied it above the 38th parallel north. After the Red Army withdraw from Manchuria, the Chinese Civil War would extend into that region. Mao Zedong's Communist Party of China, though receptive to minimal Soviet support, defeated the pro-Western and heavily American-assisted Chinese Nationalist Party (Kuomintang, KMT) in the war.

There was friction between Stalin and Mao from the beginning. During World War II Stalin had supported the dictator of China, Chiang Kai-Shek, as a bulwark against Japan and had turned a blind eye to Chiang's mass killings of communists. He generally put his alliance with Chiang against Japan ahead of helping his ideological allies in China in his priorities. Even after the war Stalin concluded a non-aggression pact between the USSR and Chiang's KMT regime in China and instructed Mao and the Chinese communists to cooperate with Chiang and the KMT after the war. Mao did not follow Stalin's instructions though and started a communist revolution against Chiang. Stalin did not believe Mao would be successful so he was less than enthusiastic in helping Mao. The USSR continued to maintain diplomatic relations with Chiang's KMT regime until 1949 when it became clear Mao would win.

Stalin supported the Turkic Muslims known today as Uyghur in seeking their own state, Second East Turkestan Republic during the Ili Rebellion against the Republic of China. He backed the Uyghur Communist Muslim leader Ehmetjan Qasim against the anti Communist Chinese Kuomintang forces.

Stalin did conclude a new friendship and alliance treaty with Mao after he defeated Chiang. But there was still a lot of tension between the two leaders and resentment by Mao for Stalin's less than enthusiastic help during the civil war in China.


Mao at Stalin's 70th birthday celebration in Moscow, December 1949
The Communists controlled mainland China while the Nationalists held a rump state on the island of Taiwan. The Soviet Union soon after recognized Mao's People's Republic of China, which it regarded as a new ally. The People's Republic claimed Taiwan, though it had never held authority there.

Diplomatic relations between the Soviet Union and China reached a high point with the signing of the 1950 Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance. Both countries provided military support to a new friendly state in North Korea. After various Korean border conflicts, war broke out with U.S.-allied South Korea in 1950, starting the Korean War.

The North Korean Army struck in the pre-dawn hours of Sunday, 25 June 1950, crossing the 38th parallel behind a firestorm of artillery, beginning their invasion of South Korea.[270] During the Korean War, Soviet pilots flew Soviet aircraft from Chinese bases against United Nations aircraft defending South Korea. Post-Cold War research in Soviet Archives has revealed that the Korean War was begun by Kim Il-sung with the express permission of Stalin.[271][272][273][274]

Israel
Stalin originally supported the creation of Israel in 1948. The USSR was one of the first nations to recognize the new country.[275] Golda Meir came to Moscow as the first Israeli Ambassador to the USSR that year. However, after providing war materiel for Israel through Czechoslovakia from 1947 to 1949, Stalin later changed his mind and came out against Israel.

Falsifiers of History
In 1948, Stalin personally edited and rewrote by hand sections of the cold war book Falsifiers of History.[276] Falsifiers was published in response to the documents made public in Nazi-Soviet Relations, 1939C1941: Documents from the Archives of The German Foreign Office,[277][278] which included the secret protocols of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact and other secret German-Soviet relations documents.[277][279] Falsifiers originally appeared as a series of articles in Pravda in February 1948,[278] and was subsequently published in numerous languages and distributed worldwide.[280]

The book did not attempt to directly counter or deal with the documents published in Nazi-Soviet Relations[281] and rather, focused upon Western culpability for the outbreak of war in 1939.[280] It argues that "Western powers" aided Nazi rearmament and aggression, including that American bankers and industrialists provided capital for the growth of German war industries, while deliberately encouraging Hitler to expand eastward.[277] It depicted the Soviet Union as striving to negotiate a collective security against Hitler, while being thwarted by double-dealing Anglo-French appeasers who, despite appearances, had no intention of a Soviet alliance and were secretly negotiating with Berlin.[280] It casts the Munich agreement, not just as Anglo-French short-sightedness or cowardice, but as a "secret" agreement that was "a highly important phase in their policy aimed at goading the Hitlerite aggressors against the Soviet Union."[282] The book also included the claim that, during the Pact's operation, Stalin rejected Hitler's offer to share in a division of the world, without mentioning the Soviet offers to join the Axis. Historical studies, official accounts, memoirs and textbooks published in the Soviet Union used that depiction of events until the Soviet Union's dissolution.[283]

Domestic support
Domestically, Stalin was seen as a great wartime leader who had led the Soviets to victory against the Nazis.

An increasingly nationalistic emphasis on Russian history and achievements became a salient feature of Soviet culture in the 1940s.[citation needed] At the end of May 1945, Stalin proposed a victory toast to the Soviet people, and to the virtues of the Russian majority in particular:

I should like to propose a toast to the health of our Soviet people, and in the first place, the Russian people. (Loud and prolonged applause and shouts of 'Hurrah!')

I drink in the first place to the health of the Russian people because it is the most outstanding nation of all the nations forming the Soviet Union.
I propose a toast to the health of the Russian people because it has won in this war universal recognition as the leading force of the Soviet Union among all the peoples of our country.
I propose a toast to the health of the Russian people not only because it is the leading people, but also because it possesses a clear mind, a staunch character, and patience.[284]

"Doctors' plot"
Main article: Doctors' plot
See also: Stalin and anti-Semitism
The "Doctors' plot" was a plot outlined by Stalin and Soviet officials in 1952 and 1953 whereby several doctors (over half of whom were Jewish) allegedly attempted to kill Soviet officials.[285] The prevailing opinion of many scholars outside the Soviet Union is that Stalin intended to use the resulting doctors' trial to launch a massive party purge.[286] The plot is also viewed by many historians as an antisemitic provocation.[285] It followed on the heels of the 1952 show trials of the Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee[287] and the secret execution of thirteen members on Stalin's orders in the Night of the Murdered Poets.[288]

Thereafter, in a December Politburo session, Stalin announced that "Every Jewish nationalist is the agent of the American intelligence service. Jewish nationalists think that their nation was saved by the United States (there you can become rich, bourgeois, etc.). They think they're indebted to the Americans. Among doctors, there are many Jewish nationalists."[289] To mobilize the Soviet people for his campaign, Stalin ordered TASS and Pravda to issue stories along with Stalin's alleged uncovering of a "Doctors Plot" to assassinate top Soviet leaders,[290][291] including Stalin, in order to set the stage for show trials.[292]

The next month, Pravda published stories with text regarding the purported "Jewish bourgeois-nationalist" plotters.[293] Nikita Khrushchev wrote that Stalin hinted him to incite anti-Semitism in the Ukraine, telling him that "the good workers at the factory should be given clubs so they can beat the hell out of those Jews."[294][295] Stalin also ordered falsely accused physicians to be tortured "to death".[296] Regarding the origins of the plot, people who knew Stalin, such as Khrushchev, suggest that Stalin had long harbored negative sentiments toward Jews,[285][297][298] and anti-Semitic trends in the Kremlin's policies were further fueled by the exile of Leon Trotsky.[285][299] In 1946, Stalin allegedly said privately that "every Jew is a potential spy."[285][300] At the end of January 1953, Stalin's personal physician Miron Vovsi (cousin of Solomon Mikhoels, who was assassinated in 1948 at the orders of Stalin)[288] was arrested within the frame of the plot. Vovsi was released by Beria after Stalin's death in 1953, as was his son-in-law, the composer Mieczyslaw Weinberg.

Some historians have argued that Stalin was also planning to send millions of Jews to four large newly built labor camps in Western Russia[292][301] using a "Deportation Commission"[302][303][304] that would purportedly act to save Soviet Jews from an enraged Soviet population after the Doctors Plot trials.[302][305][306] Others argue that any charge of an alleged mass deportation lacks specific documentary evidence.[291] Regardless of whether a plot to deport Jews was planned, in his "Secret Speech" in 1956, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev stated that the Doctors Plot was "fabricated ... set up by Stalin", that Stalin told the judge to beat confessions from the defendants[307] and had told Politburo members "You are blind like young kittens. What will happen without me? The country will perish because you do not know how to recognize enemies."[307]

Death and legacy

Stalin's funeral. From right: Khrushchev, Beria, Chou En-Lai, Malenkov, Voroshilov, Kaganovich, Bulganin, Molotov. (Sovfoto)
Stalin's health deteriorated towards the end of World War II. He suffered from atherosclerosis from his heavy smoking, a mild stroke around the time of the Victory Parade, and a severe heart attack in October 1945.[308]

In the early morning hours of 1 March 1953, after an all-night dinner and a movie,[309] Stalin arrived at his Kuntsevo residence 15 km west of Moscow centre, with interior minister Lavrentiy Beria and future premiers Georgy Malenkov, Nikolai Bulganin, and Nikita Khrushchev, where he retired to his bedroom to sleep. At dawn, Stalin did not emerge from his room.

Although his guards thought that it was strange not to see him awake at his usual time, they were strictly instructed not to bother him and left him alone the entire day. At around 10 p.m., he was discovered by Peter Lozgachev, the Deputy Commandant of Kuntsevo, who entered his bedroom to check on him and recalled the scene of Stalin lying on his back on the floor of his room beside his bed, wearing pyjama bottoms and an undershirt, with his clothes soaked in stale urine. A frightened Lozgachev asked Stalin what happened to him, but all he could get out of him was unintelligible responses that sounded like "Dzhhhhh." Lozgachev used the bedroom telephone to frantically call a few party officials; he told them that Stalin may have had a stroke and asked them to send good doctors to the Kuntsevo residence immediately.[310][311] Lavrentiy Beria was informed and arrived a few hours afterwards. The doctors arrived in the early morning of 2 March when they changed Stalin's bedclothes and tended to him. They diagnosed him with a cerebral hemorrhage (stroke) caused by hypertension (high blood pressure), with stomach hemorrhage facilitating.[312] He was treated in his dacha with leeches, as was customary at the time.[313] On 3 March his double Felix Dadaev was recalled from vacation to Moscow "to be ready to stand in for Stalin if needed", but he never needed to. On 4 March Stalin's illness was broadcast in the media with surprising detail such as pulse, blood pressure and urinalysis; for convenience the time of his stroke was said to be 2 March and his location as Moscow. The bedridden Stalin died on 5 March 1953, at the age of 74.[2]

Suggestions of assassination
The political memoirs of Vyacheslav Molotov, published in 1993, claimed that Beria had boasted to Molotov that he poisoned Stalin: "I took him out."[314]

Stomach hemorrhage is usually not caused by high blood pressure, but is, along with stroke, consistent with overdose of warfarin, a colorless, tasteless, anticoagulant drug.[315] In the treating physicians' final report submitted to the Central Committee in July 1953, any mention of the stomach hemorrhage was "deleted or vastly subordinated to other information." In 2004, American historian Jonathan Brent and Russia's Presidential Commission for the Rehabilitation of Repressed Persons executive secretary Vladimir Naumov published a book proposing that Beria, with the complicity of Khrushchev, slipped warfarin into Stalin's wine on the night of his death.[312]

Stalin's autopsy, conducted by the Soviet Ministry of Health in March 1953 but not released until 2011, confirmed the cause of death as stroke resulting from high blood pressure, and that hypertension had caused cardiac hemorrhage (not usually caused by high blood pressure) and gastrointestinal hemorrhage as well. In 2011, Miguel A. Faria, President of Mercer University School of Medicine, retired clinical professor of neurosurgery and adjunct professor of medical history, interpreted the autopsy's composition as the examiners' desire to demonstrate for posterity that they had fulfilled their professional duties as best they could by mentioning the non-cerebral hemorrhages. At the same time they would have provided themselves political cover by purposely attributing the hemorrhages to hypertension instead of poisoning by warfarin. Faria noted that when the autopsy was performed, "Stalin was worshipped as a demigod, and his assassination would have been unacceptable to the Russian populace." He also notes that Stalin experienced renal hemorrhages during his death, which is unlikely to be caused by high blood pressure.[315]


A former prisoner Nikolai Getman who spent the years 1945-1953 in Gulag, recorded his testimony in pictures rather than words.[316]
Announcement and Reactions
Yuri Levitan, the announcer who during the war brought the Soviet people news of victoriesbut never of defeatsannounced Stalin's death. Slowly, solemnly, with a voice brimming over with emotion, he read:[317]

The Central Committee of the Communist party, the Council of Ministers and the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR announce with deep grief to the party and all workers that on 5 March, at 9.50 p.m., Iosif Vissarionovich Stalin, Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist party and Chairman of the Council of Ministers, has died after a serious illness. The heart of the collaborator and follower of the genius of Lenin's work, the wise leader and teacher of the Communist party and of the Soviet people, has stopped beating.

After a visitation of 1.5 million people, his embalmed body was laid to rest on 9 March 1953 in Lenin's Mausoleum. On 31 October 1961 his body was removed from the mausoleum and buried in the Kremlin Wall Necropolis next to the Kremlin walls as part of the process of de-Stalinization.[313]

The Chinese government instituted a period of official mourning for Stalin's death. Mao ordered the flag be flown at half-mast, and banned recreation for three days; he also eulogized Stalin in an article "as a great leader, a Marxist theorist, and a friend of China". On 9 March, the country observed a five-minute period of silence in Stalin's memory.[318]

Aftermath
His demise arrived at a convenient time for Lavrentiy Beria and others, who feared being swept away in yet another purge. It is believed that Stalin felt Beria's power was too great and threatened his own.[319]

After Stalin's death a power struggle for his vacant position took place between the following eight senior members of the Presidium of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union listed according to the order of precedence presented formally on 5 March 1953:[320] Georgy Malenkov, Lavrentiy Beria, Vyacheslav Molotov, Klim Voroshilov, Nikita Khrushchev, Nikolai Bulganin, Lazar Kaganovich, Anastas Mikoyan. If Beria did have a hand in Stalin's death, it ended up doing him little good, as he would be executed before the year was out.

The struggle lasted until 1958 and eventually Khrushchev won, having defeated all his potential rivals in the Presidium.

Reaction by successors

Grutas Park is home to a monument of Stalin, originally set up in Vilnius.

Monument to Stalin stood in Gori, Georgia, until 2010 when it was demolished.[321]
The harshness with which Soviet affairs were conducted during Stalin's rule was subsequently repudiated by his successors in the Communist Party leadership, most notably by Nikita Khrushchev's repudiation of Stalinism in February 1956. In his "Secret Speech", On the Personality Cult and its Consequences, delivered to a closed session of the 20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Khrushchev denounced Stalin for his cult of personality, and his regime for "violation of Leninist norms of legality".

A 1974 Soviet work describes Stalin's leadership in the following manner:

J. V. Stalin had held, since 1922, the post of General Secretary of the Communist Party Central Committee. He had made important contributions to the implementation of the Party's policy of socialist construction in the USSR, and he had won great popularity by his relentless fight against the anti-Leninist groups of the Trotskyites and Bukharinites. Since the early 1930s, however, all the successes achieved by the Soviet people in the building of socialism began to be arbitrarily attributed to Stalin. Already in a letter written back in 1922 Lenin warned the Party Central Committee: "Comrade Stalin," he wrote, "having become general secretary, has concentrated boundless authority in his hands, and I am not sure whether he will always be able to exercise that authority with sufficient discretion." During the first few years after Lenin's death Stalin reckoned with his critical remarks. As time passed, however, he abused his position of General Secretary of the Party Central Committee more and more frequently, violating the principle of collective leadership and making independent decisions on important Party and state issues. Those personal shortcomings of which Lenin had warned manifested themselves with greater and greater insistence: his rudeness, capriciousness, intolerance of criticism, arbitrariness, excessive suspiciousness, etc. This led to unjustified restrictions of democracy, gross violations of socialist legality and repressions against prominent Party, government and military leaders and other people.[322]

Views on Stalin in contemporary Russia

Ukrainian President Yanukovych and Russian President Medvedev on 17 May 2010 near Memorial to the Holodomor victims in Kiev.
Results of a controversial poll taken in 2006 stated that over 35% of Russians would vote for Stalin if he were still alive.[323][324] Fewer than a third of all Russians regarded Stalin as a "murderous tyrant";[10] however, a Russian court in 2009, ruling on a suit by Stalin's grandson Yevgeny Dzhugashvili against the newspaper Novaya Gazeta, ruled that referring to Stalin as a "bloodthirsty cannibal" was not libel.[325] In a July 2007 poll, 54% of the Russian youth agreed that Stalin did more good than bad while 46% (of them) disagreed that Stalin was a "cruel tyrant". Half of the respondents, aged from 16 to 19, agreed Stalin was a wise leader.[11]

In December 2008, Stalin was voted third in the nationwide television show Name of Russia, (Russia TV channel aimed to elect the most notable personality in Russian history by voting via the Internet, radio and television) narrowly behind 13th-century prince Alexander Nevsky and Pyotr Stolypin, one of Nicholas II's prime ministers. The Communist Party accused the Kremlin in rigging the poll in order to prevent him or Lenin being given first place.[326]

On 3 July 2009, Russia's delegates walked out of an Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe session to demonstrate their objections to a resolution for a remembrance day for the "victims of both Nazism and Stalinism".[327] Only eight out of 385 assembly members voted against the resolution.[327]

In a Kremlin video blog posted on 29 October 2009, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev denounced the efforts of people seeking to rehabilitate Stalin's image. He said the mass extermination during the Stalin era cannot be justified.[328]

In a 2013 Q&A session, when asked whether Russia should restore statues of its Soviet-era leaders, Russian President Vladimir Putin replied "What is the essential difference between (Oliver) Cromwell and (Joseph) Stalin? Can you tell me? No difference...(Cromwell's) monument is standing, (and) no one is going to remove it. The essence is not in these symbols, but in the need to treat with respect every period of our history."[329][330]

In a March 2016 Levada Center poll 54% of Russians believe that Stalin played a positive role in the history and believed Stalin was a wise leader who led the Soviet Union to prosperity.[331] 60% of respondents did not want to live under a head of state who resembled Stalin.[331] In 2008 this number was 74%.[331] Two thirds of all polled regarded Stalin as a "murderous tyrant" while 23% stated to have "positive feelings" for Stalin.[331]

Views on Stalin in other former Soviet states
Georgia
In 2013 a survey by Tbilisi University, commissioned by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, found that 45% of Georgians expressed "a positive attitude to Stalin".[332]

Ukraine

Victims of Stalin's Great Terror in the Bykivnia mass graves, near Kiev, Ukraine
In a poll taken by the Kiev International Institute of Sociology in February 2013, 37% of all Ukrainians had "a negative attitude to the figure of Stalin" and 22% "a positive [one]".[333] Positive attitudes prevailed in East Ukraine (36%) and South Ukraine (27%), and negative attitudes in West Ukraine (64%) and Central Ukraine (39%).[333] In the age group 18C29, 16% had positive feelings towards Stalin.[333]

Early 2010 a Ukrainian court convicted Stalin of genocide against the Ukrainian nation during the Soviet famine of 1932C1933.[334][335]

In the spring of 2010 a new monument in honor of Stalin was erected in Zaporizhia.[335] In late December 2010 the statue had his head cut off by unidentified vandals and the following New Year's Eve it was completely destroyed in an explosion.[336] On 25 February 2011 Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych stated "Ukraine will definitely not revise its negative view" on Stalin.[336] Ukraine and Poland unveiled a memorial (outside Kiev) to the thousands of Ukrainians, Poles and others killed by Stalin's secret police ahead of World War II in September 2012.[337]

In a Kiev International Institute of Sociology poll taken in February 2016 of all respondents 38% had a negative attitude to Stalin, 26% a neutral one and 17% a positive (19% refused to answer).[338]

Armenia
According to a 2012 study, 72% of Armenians do not want to live in a country led by someone like Stalin.[339]

Personal life

Stalin walking on a Moscow sidewalk in the late 1920s
Origin of name, nicknames and pseudonyms
Stalin's (Russian: ? ? ?, pronounced [?j?s??f v??s??r??n?v??t? ?stal??n]) original Georgian name is transliterated as "Ioseb Besarionis dze Jughashvili" (Georgian: ????? ?????????? ?? ????????? [i?s?b b?sri?nis dz? d?u??vili]). The Russian transliteration of his name ? ? ? is in turn transliterated to English as "Iosif Vissarionovich Dzhugashvili". Like other Bolsheviks, he became commonly known by one of his revolutionary noms de guerre, of which "Stalin" was only the last. "Stalin" is based on the Russian word  stal, meaning "steel", and the name as a whole is supposed to mean "man of steel".[340] Prior nicknames included "Koba", "Soselo", "Ivanov" and many others.[341]

Stalin is believed to have started using the name "K. Stalin" sometime in 1912 as a pen name.

During Stalin's reign his nicknames included:

"Uncle Joe", by western media, during and after World War II.[342][343]
"Kremlin Highlander" (Russian:  ), in reference his Caucasus Mountains origin, notably by Osip Mandelstam in his Stalin Epigram.
"Vozhd"' (Russian: , "the Chieftain"), a term equivalent to the English word "Leader".[citation needed]
Appearance
While photographs and portraits portray Stalin as physically massive and majestic (he had several painters shot who did not depict him "right"),[344] he was only 5 feet 6 inches (1.68 m) tall[344] (President Harry S. Truman, who stood 5 feet 9 inches (1.75 m) himself, described Stalin as "a little squirt").[345] His mustached face was pock-marked from small-pox during childhood. After a carriage accident in his youth, his left arm was shortened and stiffened at the elbow, while his right hand was thinner than his left and frequently hidden.[344] Bronze casts made in 1990 from plaster death mask and plaster casts of his hands clearly show a normal right hand and a withered left hand.[346][clarification needed] He could be charming and polite, mainly towards visiting statesmen.[344] In movies, Stalin was often played by Mikheil Gelovani and, less frequently, by Aleksei Dikiy.

Marriages and family

Ekaterina "Kato" Svanidze, Stalin's first wife
Stalin married his first wife Ekaterina Svanidze in 1906, with whom he had a son, Yakov. Yakov shot himself because of Stalin's harshness toward him, but survived. After this, Stalin said, "He can't even shoot straight."[347] Yakov served in the Red Army during World War II and was captured by the Germans. They offered to exchange him for Field Marshal Friedrich Paulus, who had surrendered after Stalingrad, but Stalin turned the offer down, stating, "You have in your hands not only my son Yakov, but millions of my sons. Either you free them all or my son will share their fate."[348] Afterwards, Yakov is said to have committed suicide, running into an electric fence in Sachsenhausen concentration camp, where he was being held.[349] Yakov had a son Yevgeny, who has recently defended his grandfather's legacy in Russian courts. Yevgeny is married to a Georgian woman, has two sons, and seven grandchildren.[350]


Stalin and his second wife Nadezhda Alliluyeva

Beria with Stalin (in background), Stalin's daughter Svetlana, and Nestor Lakoba on Stalin's dacha at Lake Ritsa.[351]
With his second wife Nadezhda Alliluyeva Stalin had a son, Vasiliy, and a daughter, Svetlana. Nadezhda died in 1932, officially of illness. She may have committed suicide by shooting herself after a quarrel with Stalin, leaving a suicide note which according to their daughter was "partly personal, partly political."[352] According to A&E Biography, there is also a belief among some Russians that Stalin himself murdered his wife after the quarrel, which apparently took place at a dinner in which Stalin tauntingly flicked cigarettes across the table at her.

Vasiliy rose through the ranks of the Soviet Air Force, officially dying of alcoholism in 1962; however, this is still in question. He distinguished himself in World War II as a capable airman. Svetlana defected to the United States in 1967, where she later married William Wesley Peters, the apprentice of Frank Lloyd Wright. She died in Richland Center, Wisconsin on 22 November 2011, from complications of colon cancer.[353] Olga, her daughter with Peters, now goes by the name Chrese Evans and lives in Portland, Oregon.[354]

In March 2001, Russian Independent Television NTV interviewed a previously unknown grandson living in Novokuznetsk, Yuri Davydov, who stated that his father had told him of his lineage, but, was told to keep quiet because of the campaign against Stalin's cult of personality.[355]

Beside his suite in the Kremlin, Stalin had numerous domiciles. In 1919, he started with a country house near Usovo, he added dachas at Zuvalova and Kuntsevo (Blizhny dacha built by Miron Merzhanov). Before World War II he added the Lipki estate and Semyonovskaya and had at least four dachas in the south by 1937, including one near Sochi. A luxury villa near Gagri was given to him by Beria. In Abkhazia he maintained a mountain retreat. After the war he added dachas at Novy Afon, near Sukhumi, in the Valdai Hills, and at Lake Mitsa. Another estate was near Zelyony Myss on the Black Sea. All these dachas, estates, and palaces were staffed, well-furnished and equipped, kept safe by security forces, and were mainly used privately, rarely for diplomatic purposes.[356] Between places Stalin would travel by car or train, never by air; he flew only once when attending the 1943 Tehran conference.

Other relationships
While exiled in Siberia, Stalin had an affair with Maria Kuzakova who had an out-of-wedlock child, Konstantin Kuzakov, born after his escape.[357] According to Radzinsky and Montefiore, he also had a long-term relationship with his housekeeper Valentina Istomina from 1934 [357][358] The relationship was not officially admitted by the Soviet authorities. Vyacheslav Molotov once said: "Whether or not she was Stalin's wife is nobody else's business".[358]

Habits

Stalin inspecting the first ZIS, model 101
Stalin enjoyed drinking, and would often force those around him to join in.[359] He preferred Georgian wine over Russian vodka, but usually ate traditional Russian food.[359]

Khrushchev reports in his memoirs that Stalin was fond of American cowboy movies.[360] He would often sleep until evening in his dacha, and after waking up summon high-ranking Soviet politicians to watch foreign movies with him in the Kremlin movie theater.[360] The movies, being in foreign languages, were given a running translation by Ivan Bolshakov, people's commissar of cinema.[360] The translations were hilarious for the audience as Bolshakov spoke very basic English.[361] His favourite films were westerns and Charlie Chaplin episodes. He banned any hint of nudity. When Ivan showed a film with a naked woman Stalin shouted, "Are you making a brothel here, Bolshakov?" After a movie had ended, Stalin often invited the audience for dinner, even though the clock was usually past midnight.[360] In the aftermath of the war, he took control over all of Joseph Goebbels' films.

Stalin was an accomplished billiards player,[362] and could read 500 pages a day, having a library of over 20,000 books.[363]

Stalin was also afraid of flying, which is one reason he chose the site of the Yalta conference so he could travel by train.[364]

Religion
Stalin was raised in the Georgian Orthodox faith,[citation needed] but later gave it up. Stalin had a complex relationship with religious institutions in the Soviet Union.[365] Historians Vladislav Zubok and Constantine Pleshakov have suggested that "[Stalin's] atheism remained rooted in some vague idea of a God of nature."[366]

During the Second World War, Stalin reopened the churches. One reason could have been to motivate the majority of the population, who had Christian beliefs. The reasoning behind this is that by changing the official policy of the party and the state towards religion, the Church and its clergymen could be at his disposal in mobilizing the war effort. On 4 September 1943, Stalin invited Metropolitan Sergius, Metropolitan Alexius and Metropolitan Nicholas to the Kremlin and proposed to reestablish the Moscow Patriarchate, which had been suspended since 1925, and elect the Patriarch. On 8 September 1943, Metropolitan Sergius was elected patriarch.

The CPSU Central Committee continued to promote atheism and the elimination of religion during the remainder of Stalin's lifetime after the 1943 concordat.[367] Stalin's greater tolerance for religion after 1943 was limited by party machinations. Whether persecutions after World War II were more aimed at certain sections of society over and above detractors is disputed.


Communist Party of Great Britain (MarxistCLeninist) contingent at London May Day march in 2008, carrying a banner of Stalin.
Controversies about Stalin
There are conflicting accounts of Stalin's birth, who before coming to power in 1922 listed his birth year in various documents as 1878.[2] The phrase "death of one man is a tragedy, death of a million is a statistic" is sometimes attributed to Stalin, although there is no proof of his saying that.[368] In addition, hypotheses and popular rumors exist that Stalin's biological father was explorer Nicolay Przhevalsky.[369] Some Bolsheviks and others have accused Stalin of being an agent for the Okhrana.[370] It is also widely believed that the Red Terror was begun by Stalin.[371]

Decorations and awards
Hero of the Soviet Union
Hero of Socialist Labour
Order of Victory, twice
Order of the Red Banner, three times
Jubilee Medal "XX Years of the Workers' and Peasants' Red Army"
Order of Lenin, three times (1939, 1945 and 1949)
Order of Suvorov, 1st class
Medal "For the Defence of Moscow"
Medal "For the Victory over Germany in the Great Patriotic War 1941C1945"
Medal "For the Victory over Japan"
Medal "In Commemoration of the 800th Anniversary of Moscow"
Order of Sukhbaatar, twice (Mongolia)
Medal "For the Victory over Japan" (Mongolia)
Medal "25 years of the Mongolian People's Revolution" (Mongolia)
Hero of the Mongolian People's Republic (Mongolia)
Order of the Red Star, three times
Czechoslovak War Cross 1939-1945, three times
Order of the White Lion, 5th class and 1st class (Czechoslovakia)
Works

Book cover of On Lenin and Leninism, published in 1924
See also: Stalin's poetry
"Anarchism or Socialism?," 1907
"Marxism and the National Question," 1913
"The Principles of Leninism," 1924
"Trotskyism or Leninism?," 1924
"On Lenin and Leninism," May 1924
"The new Russian policy", John Day (1931)
"Dialectical and Historical Materialism," 1938
"The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union," 1938
"The Questions of Leninism," 1946
"Marxism and Problems of Linguistics," 1950
"Economic Problems of Socialism in the U.S.S.R.," 1952
Works. Volume 1C13: Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow, 1950s/"Volume 14": Red Star Press, London 1978
Stalin was also a well-regarded poet in his youth. Some of his poems were published in Ilia Chavchavadze's journal Iveria and later anthologized.[372][373]

See also
Index of Soviet Union-related articles
Anti-Stalinist left
Joseph Stalin Museum, Gori
Neo-Stalinism
Stalin Bloc C For the USSR
Stalin Monument in Budapest
Stalin Monument in Prague
Stalin Note
Stalin Peace Prize
Stalin Society
Stalinism
Stalinist architecture
Tax on trees
List of places named after Joseph Stalin
Democracy and Totalitarianism
The Kolyma Tales
Yanks for Stalin
Biography portal Communism portal Georgia portal iconPolitics portal Soviet Union portal
Notes
Jump up ^ "Stalin". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Although there is an inconsistency among published sources about Stalin's year and date of birth, Iosif Dzhugashvili is found in the records of the Uspensky Church in Gori, Georgia as born on 18 December (Old Style: 6 December) 1878. This birth date is maintained in his School Leaving Certificate, his extensive tsarist Russia police file, a police arrest record from 18 April 1902 which gave his age as 23 years, and all other surviving pre-Revolution documents. As late as 1921, Stalin himself listed his birthday as 18 December 1878 in a curriculum vitae in his own handwriting. However, after his coming to power in 1922, Stalin changed the date to 21 December 1879 (Old Style date 9 December 1879). That became the day his birthday was celebrated in the Soviet Union. See "Prominent figures". Russian Information Network. Retrieved 19 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Dmitri Volkogonov, Lenin. A New Biography, translated and edited by Harold Shukman (New York: The Free Press, 1994), p. 185.
Jump up ^ Wheatcroft, S. G.; Davies, R. W.; Cooper, J. M. (1986). Soviet Industrialization Reconsidered: Some Preliminary Conclusions about Economic Development between 1926 and 1941 39. Economic History Review. pp. 30C2. ISBN 978-0-7190-4600-1.
Jump up ^ Getty, Rittersporn, Zemskov (1993). "Victims of the Soviet Penal System in the Pre-War Years: A First Approach on the Basis of Archival Evidence" (PDF). The American Historical Review 98 (4): 1017C1049. doi:10.2307/2166597. JSTOR 2166597.
Jump up ^ Gleason, Abbott (2009). A Companion to Russian History. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 373. ISBN 1-4051-3560-3
Jump up ^ Weinberg, G.L. (1995). A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II. Cambridge University Press. p. 264. ISBN 0-521-55879-4.
Jump up ^ Rozhnov, Konstantin (5 May 2005) Who won World War II?. BBC.
Jump up ^ Adelman, Jonathan R.; Gibson, Christann Lea (1989). Contemporary Soviet Military Affairs: The Legacy of World War II. Unwin Hyman. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-04-445031-3.
^ Jump up to: a b How Russia faced its dark past, BBC News (5 March 2003)
^ Jump up to: a b "Russian youth: Stalin good, migrants must go: poll", Reuters (25 July 2007)
Jump up ^ "The Big Question: Why is Stalin still popular in Russia, despite the brutality of his regime? ", The Independent (14 May 2008)
Jump up ^ "Josef Stalin: revered and reviled in modern Russia", The Telegraph (15 June 2012)
Jump up ^ ""Among the Dead", MississippiReview.com". Archived from the original on 18 March 2008. Retrieved 27 March 2008.
Jump up ^ Montefiore 2007, p. 54.
Jump up ^ Kotkin 2014, pp. 31C6
Jump up ^ Montefiore 2007, p. 61.
Jump up ^ Montefiore 2007.
^ Jump up to: a b Montefiore, Simon Sebag (2005). Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar. New York: Vintage. pp. 32C34. ISBN 1400076781. Retrieved 9 September 2015.
Jump up ^ Hingley, Ronald (1974). Joseph Stalin: Man and Legend. New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 120. ISBN 0070289433.
Jump up ^ Service, Robert (2005) Stalin: A Biography. p. 172 ISBN 978-0-330-41913-0
Jump up ^ A century's journey: how the great powers shape the world C Page 175 C by Robert A. Pastor, Stanley Hoffmann C Political Science C 1999.
Jump up ^ Kellerman, Henry (2014). Psychoanalysis of Evil: Perspectives on Destructive Behavior. Cham, Switzerland: Springer. p. 113. ISBN 3319073915. Retrieved 9 September 2015.
Jump up ^ Knight, Ami W. (1991). "Beria and the Cult of Stalin: Rewriting Transcaucasian Party History". Soviet Studies 43 (4): 749C763. doi:10.1080/09668139108411959.
Jump up ^ Shanin, Teodor (1989). "Ethnicity in the Soviet Union: Analytical Perceptions and Political Strategies". Comparative Studies in Society and History 31 (3): 409C424. doi:10.1017/S0010417500015978.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e f g Service, Robert (2005) Stalin: A Biography, ISBN 978-0-330-41913-0
Jump up ^ The new cambridge modern history. volume xii. London: Cambridge Press. 1968. p. 453. ISBN 978-1-139-05588-8.
Jump up ^ Fainsod & Hough 1979, p. 111.
Jump up ^ Zarrow, Peter Gue (2005). China in war and revolution, 1895C1949. Psychology Press. p. 233. ISBN 0-415-36447-7.
Jump up ^ Elleman, Bruce (2008). Moscow and the Emergence of Communist Power in China, 1925C30. ISBN 978-1-134-00256-6.
Jump up ^ North, Robert Carver (1963). Moscow and Chinese Communists. Stanford University Press. p. 96. ISBN 0-8047-0453-8.
Jump up ^ Moss, Walter (2005). A history of Russia: Since 1855. Anthem Press. p. 282. ISBN 1-84331-034-1.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e f g h i j Montefiore 2004
Jump up ^ Soviet Readers Finally Told Moscow Had Trotsky Slain. Published in the New York Times on 5 January 1989. Retrieved 4 October 2007
Jump up ^ Levinson, Martin H. When Good Things Happen to Bad People.
Jump up ^ "Stalin Facts: 10 little known facts - Military History Monthly". military-history.org.
Jump up ^ Tuominen, Arvo. The Bells of the Kremlin. p. 162. ISBN 0-87451-249-2.
Jump up ^ Khrushchev, Nikita. "The cult of the individual - part 1 (speech reprinted 26 April 2007)". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 September 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Figes, Orlando The Whisperers: Private Life in Stalin's Russia, 2007, ISBN 0-8050-7461-9
Jump up ^ Gellately 2007.
Jump up ^ Kershaw, Ian and Lewin, Moshe (1997) Stalinism and Nazism: Dictatorships in Comparison, Cambridge University Press ISBN 0-521-56521-9, p. 300
Jump up ^ Kuper, Leo (1982) Genocide: Its Political Use in the Twentieth Century, Yale University Press, ISBN 0-300-03120-3
Jump up ^ Brackman 2001, p. 204.
Jump up ^ The exact number of negative votes is unknown. In his memoirs Anastas Mikoian writes that out of 1225 delegates, around 270 voted against Stalin and that the official number of negative votes was given as three, with the rest of ballots destroyed. Following Khrushchev's secret speech in 1956, a commission of the central committee investigated the votes and found that 267 ballots were missing.
Jump up ^ Brackman 2001, pp. 205C6.
Jump up ^ Brackman 2001, p. 207.
^ Jump up to: a b Overy 2004, p. 182.
Jump up ^ Tucker 1992, p. 456.
Jump up ^ Snyder, Timothy. Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin. Basic Books, 2010. ISBN 0-465-00239-0 p. 137
Jump up ^ "Newseum: The Commissar Vanishes". Retrieved 19 July 2008.
Jump up ^ The scale of Stalin's purge of Red Army officers was exceptional90% of all generals and 80% of all colonels were killed. This included three out of five Marshals, 13 out of 15 Army commanders, 57 of 85 Corps commanders, 110 of 195 divisional commanders and 220 of 406 brigade commanders as well as all commanders of military districts: p. 195, Carell, P. (1964) Hitler's War on Russia: The Story of the German Defeat in the East. translated from German by Ewald Osers, B.I. Publications New Delhi, 1974 (first Indian edition)
Jump up ^ Geoffrey Roberts (2008). Stalin's Wars: From World War to Cold War, 1939-1953. Yale UP. p. 63.
Jump up ^ Tucker, Robert C. (1999) Stalinism: Essays in Historical Interpretation, , American Council of Learned Societies Planning Group on Comparative Communist Studies, Transaction Publishers, ISBN 0-7658-0483-2, p. 5
Jump up ^ Overy 2004, p. 338.
Jump up ^ Tzouliadis, Tim (2 August 2008) Nightmare in the workers paradise, BBC
Jump up ^ Tzouliadis, Tim (2008) The Forsaken: An American Tragedy in Stalin's Russia. The Penguin Press, ISBN 1-59420-168-4
Jump up ^ McLoughlin, Barry; McDermott, Kevin, eds. (2002). Stalin's Terror: High Politics and Mass Repression in the Soviet Union. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 141. ISBN 1-4039-0119-8.
Jump up ^ Kuromiya, Hiroaki (2007) The Voices of the Dead: Stalin's Great Terror in the 1930s. Yale University Press, ISBN 0-300-12389-2 p. 4
Jump up ^ McLoughlin, Barry; McDermott, Kevin, eds. (2002). Stalin's Terror: High Politics and Mass Repression in the Soviet Union. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 6. ISBN 1-4039-0119-8.
Jump up ^ Snyder, Timothy (2010) Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin. Basic Books, ISBN 0-465-00239-0 p. 101
Jump up ^ Rosefielde, Stephen (1996). "Stalinism in Post-Communist Perspective: New Evidence on Killings, Forced Labour and Economic Growth in the 1930s" (PDF). Europe-Asia Studies 48 (6): 959. doi:10.1080/09668139608412393.
Jump up ^ Comment on Wheatcroft by Robert Conquest, 1999
Jump up ^ Pipes, Richard (2003) Communism: A History (Modern Library Chronicles), p. 67 ISBN 0-8129-6864-6
Jump up ^ Applebaum 2003, p. 584.
Jump up ^ Keep, John (1997). "Recent Writing on Stalin's Gulag: An Overview". Crime, History & Societies 1 (2): 91C112. doi:10.4000/chs.1014.
^ Jump up to: a b c Ellman, Michael (2007). "Stalin and the Soviet Famine of 1932C33 Revisited" (PDF). Europe-Asia Studies 59 (4): 663C693. doi:10.1080/09668130701291899.
Jump up ^ Quoted in Volkogonov, Dmitri (1991) Stalin: Triumph and Tragedy, New York, p. 210 ISBN 0-7615-0718-3
^ Jump up to: a b Kuromiya, Hiroaki (2007) The Voices of the Dead: Stalin's Great Terror in the 1930s. Yale University Press, ISBN 0-300-12389-2 p. 2
Jump up ^ Ellman, Michael (2005). "The Role of Leadership Perceptions and of Intent in the Soviet Famine of 1931C1934" (PDF). Europe-Asia Studies 57 (6): 826. doi:10.1080/09668130500199392.
^ Jump up to: a b Boobbyer 2000, p. 130.
Jump up ^ Pohl, Otto, Ethnic Cleansing in the USSR, 1937C1949, ISBN 0-313-30921-3
Jump up ^ "Soviet Transit, Camp, and Deportation Death Rates". Retrieved 25 June 2010.
Jump up ^ Bullock 1962, pp. 904C906.
Jump up ^ Conquest, Robert (1997). "Victims of Stalinism: A Comment". Europe-Asia Studies 49 (7): 1317C1319. doi:10.1080/09668139708412501. We are all inclined to accept the Zemskov totals (even if not as complete) with their 14 million intake to Gulag 'camps' alone, to which must be added 4C5 million going to Gulag 'colonies', to say nothing of the 3.5 million already in, or sent to, 'labour settlements'. However taken, these are surely 'high' figures.
Jump up ^ Williams, Brian (2000). "Commemorating 'The Deportation' in Post-Soviet Chechnya: The Role of Memorialization and Collective Memory in the 1994-1996 and 1999-2000 Russo-Chechen Wars" (PDF). History & Memory 12 (1): 2. doi:10.1353/ham.2000.0006. Retrieved 10 October 2015.
Jump up ^ "The rise of Stalin: AD1921C1924". History of Russia. HistoryWorld. Retrieved 19 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Stalin, Joseph, Dizzy with success, Pravda, 2 March 1930
Jump up ^ Stalin, Joseph, Reply to Collective Farm Comrades, Pravda, 3 April 1930
Jump up ^ "Ukraine Irks Russia With Push to Mark Stalin Famine as Genocide". Bloomberg L.P.. 3 January 2008
Jump up ^ "Overpopulation.Com " The Soviet Famines of 1921 and 1932-3".[dead link]
Jump up ^ "Ukraine's Holodomor". The Times (UK). 1 July 2008. Retrieved 19 October 2008.
Jump up ^ Bullock 1962, p. 269.
^ Jump up to: a b "The Industrialisation of Soviet Russia" (PDF). 5 C The Years of Hunger: Soviet Agriculture, 1931C1933. Palgrave Macmillan. 2004. Retrieved 28 December 2008.
Jump up ^ "Natural Disaster and Human Actions in the Soviet Famine of 1931C1933" (PDF). The Carl Beck Papers in Russian and East European Studies. 2001. Retrieved 28 December 2008.
Jump up ^ According to Ellman, although the 1946 drought was severe, government mismanagement of its grain reserves largely accounted for the population losses. Ellman, Michael (2000). "The 1947 Soviet Famine and the Entitlement Approach to Famines" (PDF). Cambridge Journal of Economics 24 (5): 603C30. doi:10.1093/cje/24.5.603.
Jump up ^ "Findings of the Commission on the Ukraine Famine". Famine Genocide. 19 April 1988.
Jump up ^ "Statement by Pope John Paul II on the 70th anniversary of the Famine". Skrobach. Retrieved 23 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Expressing the sense of the House of Representatives regarding the man-made famine that occurred in Ukraine in 1932C1933". US House of Representatives. 21 October 2003. Retrieved 23 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Bilinsky, Yaroslav (1999). "Was the Ukrainian Famine of 1932C1933 Genocide?". Journal of Genocide Research 1 (2): 147C156. doi:10.1080/14623529908413948.
Jump up ^ Lisova, Natasha (28 November 2006). "Ukraine Recognize Famine As Genocide". Associated Press.
Jump up ^ France Mesl, Gilles Pison, Jacques Vallin France-Ukraine: Demographic Twins Separated by History, Population and societies, N413, juin 2005
Jump up ^ ce Mesl, Jacques Vallin Mortalit et causes de dcs en Ukraine au XX sicle + CDRom ISBN 2-7332-0152-2 CD online data (partially C Ined.fr
Jump up ^ Kulchytsky, Stanislav and Yefimenko, Hennadiy (2003) ?? ?  1933 .  ??.   1937 .  ??:   ? at the Wayback Machine (archived 8 July 2007) (Demographic consequence of Holodomor of 1933 in Ukraine. The all-Union census of 1937 in Ukraine), Kiev, Institute of History
Jump up ^ Wheatcroft, Stephen G. (2001)        19311933 . at the Wayback Machine (archived 20 March 2008) (On demographic evidence of the tragedy of the Soviet village in 1931C1833), "  :    1927C1939 .:   .  3.  1930C1933 .",   , ISBN 5-8243-0225-1, p. 885, apendix 2
Jump up ^ "The famine of 1932C33". Encyclop?dia Britannica. Ukraine. Retrieved 25 June 2010.
Jump up ^ Kyiv court accuses Stalin leadership of organizing famine, Kyiv Post (13 January 2010)
Jump up ^ Ukraine court finds Bolsheviks guilty of Holodomor genocide, (13 January 2010)
Jump up ^ Steele, Charles N. (2002). Sustainable Development: Promoting Progress or Perpetuating Poverty? (PDF). Profile Books. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 March 2006. Retrieved 28 December 2008.
Jump up ^ "Reassessing the Standard of Living in the Soviet Union" (PDF). Centre for Economic Policy Research. 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2009. Retrieved 19 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Lewis, Robert (1994). Harrison, Mark; Davies, R.W. and Wheatcroft, S.G., eds. The Economic Transformation of the Soviet Union. Cambridge University Press. p. 188.
Jump up ^ Olival Freire Jr.: Marxism and the Quantum Controversy: Responding to Max Jammer's Question
Jump up ^ Pter Szegedi Cold War and Interpretations in Quantum Mechanics
^ Jump up to: a b c Acton, Edward (1995) Russia, The Tsarist and Soviet Legacy, Longmann Group Ltd, ISBN 0-582-08922-0
Jump up ^ Philip J. Adler; Randall L. Pouwels (1 January 2011). World Civilizations: Since 1500. Cengage Learning. pp. 590C. ISBN 978-0-495-91302-3.
Jump up ^ "Russia". Encyclop?dia Britannica Online. 2007. Retrieved 19 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Christopher Kasparek, "Prus' Pharaoh and Curtin's Translation", p. 128.
Jump up ^ Pospielovsky, Dimitry V. (1988) A History of Soviet Atheism in Theory and Practice, and the Believer, vol 2: Soviet Anti-Religious Campaigns and Persecutions, St Martin's Press, New York p. 89
Jump up ^ Yakovlev, Alexander N.; Austin, Anthony; Hollander, Paul (2002). A Century of Violence in Soviet Russia. Yale University Press. p. 165. ISBN 978-0-300-10322-9.
Jump up ^ Pipes, Richard (2001). Communism: A History. Modern Library Chronicles. p. 66. ISBN 0-679-64050-9.
Jump up ^ Joseph V.Stalin. "Voprosy leninizma", 2nd ed., Moscow, p. 589; (1951) "Istoricheskij materializm", ed. by F. B. Konstantinov, Moscow, p. 402; P. Calvert (1982). "The Concept of Class", New York, pp. 144C145
Jump up ^ "Twentieth Century Atlas C Death Tolls". See also: Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn: The Gulag Archipelago 1918C1956, 1973C1976 ISBN 0-8133-3289-3
Jump up ^ Seumas Milne: The battle for history. The Guardian. (12 September 2002). Retrieved 14 July 2013.
Jump up ^ Wheatcroft, Stephen G. (1999). "Victims of Stalinism and the Soviet Secret Police: The Comparability and Reliability of the Archival Data. Not the Last Word". Europe-Asia Studies 51 (2): 315C345. doi:10.1080/09668139999056. During 1921C53, the number of sentences was (political convictions): sentences, 4,060,306; death penalties, 799,473; camps and prisons, 2,634397; exile, 413,512; other, 215,942. In addition, during 1937C52 there were 14,269,753 non-political sentences, among them 34,228 death penalties, 2,066,637 sentences for 0C1 year, 4,362,973 for 2C5 years, 1,611,293 for 6C10 years, and 286,795 for more than 10 years. Other sentences were non-custodial
Jump up ^ Montefiore 2004, p. 649.
Jump up ^ A century of genocide: utopias of race and nation. Eric D. Weitz (2003). Princeton University Press. p.82. ISBN 0-691-00913-9
Jump up ^ Nicholas Werth, "A state against its people: violence, repression and terror in the Soviet Union" in Stphane Courtois, Mark Kramer. The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression. Harvard University Press, 1999. pp. 33C268 (223). ISBN 0-674-07608-7
Jump up ^ "Recording a Hidden History". The Washington Post. 5 April 2006
^ Jump up to: a b Roberts 2006, p. 98.
Jump up ^ Ellman, Michael (2002). "Soviet Repression Statistics: Some Comments". Europe-Asia Studies 54 (7): 1151C1172. doi:10.1080/0966813022000017177.
^ Jump up to: a b Applebaum 2003.
Jump up ^ "Soviet Studies". See also: Gellately (2007) p. 584: "Anne Applebaum is right to insist that the statistics 'can never fully describe what happened.' They do suggest, however, the massive scope of the repression and killing."
Jump up ^ Gellately 2007, p. 256.
Jump up ^ Getty, J. A.; Rittersporn, G. T.; Zemskov, V. N. (1993). "Victims of the Soviet Penal System in the Pre-war Years". American Historical Review 98 (4): 1017C49. doi:10.2307/2166597. Archived from the original on 11 June 2008.
Jump up ^ Wheatcroft, Stephen (1996). "The Scale and Nature of German and Soviet Repression and Mass Killings, 1930C45" (PDF). Europe-Asia Studies 48 (8): 1319C1353. doi:10.1080/09668139608412415. JSTOR 152781.
Jump up ^ Wheatcroft, Stephen (1990). "More light on the scale of repression and excess mortality in the Soviet Union in the 1930s" (PDF). Soviet Studies 42 (2): 355C367. doi:10.1080/09668139008411872. JSTOR 152086.
Jump up ^ Erlikman, Vadim (2004). Poteri narodonaseleniia v XX veke: spravochnik. Moscow 2004: Russkaia panorama. ISBN 5-93165-107-1.
Jump up ^ Ellman, Michael (2005). "The Role of Leadership Perceptions and of Intent in the Soviet Famine of 1931C1934" (PDF). Europe-Asia Studies (Routledge) 57 (6): 823C41. doi:10.1080/09668130500199392. Retrieved 4 July 2008.
Jump up ^ Naimark, Norman M. Stalin's Genocides (Human Rights and Crimes against Humanity). Princeton University Press, 2010. pp. 134C135. ISBN 0-691-14784-1
Jump up ^ Rosefielde, Steven. Red Holocaust. Routledge, 2009. ISBN 0-415-77757-7 pg. 259
Jump up ^ Snyder, Timothy. Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin. Basic Books, 2010. ISBN 0-465-00239-0 pp. vii, 413
Jump up ^ Davies, R. W. and Wheatcroft, Stephen G. (2004) The Years of Hunger: Soviet Agriculture, 1931C1933, ISBN 0-333-31107-8
Jump up ^ Andreev, EM, et al. (1993) Naselenie Sovetskogo Soiuza, 1922C1991. Moscow, Nauka, ISBN 5-02-013479-1
Jump up ^ Rosefielde, Steven (1997). "Documented Homicides and Excess Deaths: New Insights into the Scale of Killing in the USSR during the 1930s" (PDF). Communist and Post-Communist Studies 30 (3): 321C333. doi:10.1016/S0967-067X(97)00011-1. PMID 12295079.
Jump up ^ Montefiore (2004) p. 649: "Perhaps 20 million had been killed; 28 million deported, of whom 18 million had slaved in the Gulags"
Jump up ^ Volkogonov, Dmitri. Autopsy for an Empire: The Seven Leaders Who Built the Soviet Regime. p. 139. ISBN 0-684-83420-0. Between 1929 and 1953 the state created by Lenin and set in motion by Stalin deprived 21.5 million Soviet citizens of their lives.
Jump up ^ Yakovlev, Alexander N.; Austin, Anthony; Hollander, Paul (2004). A Century of Violence in Soviet Russia. Yale University Press. p. 234. ISBN 978-0-300-10322-9. My own many years and experience in the rehabilitation of victims of political terror allow me to assert that the number of people in the USSR who were killed for political motives or who died in prisons and camps during the entire period of Soviet power totaled 20 to 25 million. And unquestionably one must add those who died of famine C more than 5.5 million during the civil war and more than 5 million during the 1930s.
Jump up ^ Gellately (2007) p. 584: "More recent estimations of the Soviet-on-Soviet killing have been more 'modest' and range between ten and twenty million." and Stphane Courtois. The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror Repression. Harvard University Press, 1999. p. 4: "U.S.S.R.: 20 million deaths."
Jump up ^ Brent, Jonathan (2008) Inside the Stalin Archives: Discovering the New Russia. Atlas & Co., 2008, ISBN 0-9777433-3-0 Introduction online at the Wayback Machine (archived 24 February 2009) (PDF file): Estimations on the number of Stalin's victims over his twenty-five-year reign, from 1928 to 1953, vary widely, but 20 million is now considered the minimum.
Jump up ^ Rosefielde, Steven (2009) Red Holocaust. Routledge, ISBN 0-415-77757-7 p.17: "We now know as well beyond a reasonable doubt that there were more than 13 million Red Holocaust victims 1929C53, and this figure could rise above 20 million."
Jump up ^ Naimark, Norman (2010) Stalin's Genocides (Human Rights and Crimes against Humanity). Princeton University Press, p. 11: "Yet Stalin's own responsibility for the killing of some fifteen to twenty million people carries its own horrific weight ..."
Jump up ^ Conquest, Robert (1991) The Great Terror: A Reassessment, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-507132-8
Jump up ^ Conquest, Robert (2007) The Great Terror: A Reassessment, 40th Anniversary Edition, Oxford University Press, in Preface, p. xvi: "Exact numbers may never be known with complete certainty, but the total of deaths caused by the whole range of Soviet regime's terrors can hardly be lower than some fifteen million."
Jump up ^ Regimes murdering over 10 million people. hawaii.edu
Jump up ^ Rummel, R.J. (1 May 2006) How Many Did Stalin Really Murder?
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, pp. 30C32.
Jump up ^ Shirer 1990, pp. 510C535.
Jump up ^ Murphy 2006, pp. 24C28.
Jump up ^ Kochan, Lionel (1963) The Struggle For Germany. 1914C1945. New York
Jump up ^ Ericson 1999, p. 57.
Jump up ^ Roberts 1992, p. 64.
Jump up ^ Vehvil?inen, Olli, Finland in the Second World War: Between Germany and Russia, Macmillan, 2002, ISBN 0-333-80149-0, p. 30
^ Jump up to: a b Roberts 1992, pp. 57C78.
Jump up ^ Encyclop?dia Britannica (2008) German-Soviet Nonaggression Pact
^ Jump up to: a b Text of the Nazi-Soviet Non-Aggression Pact, executed 23 August 1939
Jump up ^ Christie, Kenneth, Historical Injustice and Democratic Transition in Eastern Asia and Northern Europe: Ghosts at the Table of Democracy, RoutledgeCurzon, 2002, ISBN 0-7007-1599-1
Jump up ^ Shirer, William L. (1990) The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany, Simon and Schuster, ISBN 0-671-72868-7, p. 541
Jump up ^ Wegner 1997, p. 584.
Jump up ^ Rancour-Laferriere, D. Mind of Stalin. p.80. ISBN 978-0875010533
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 43.
Jump up ^ Sanford, George (2005). Katyn and the Soviet Massacre of 1940: Truth, Justice And Memory. London, New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-33873-5.
Jump up ^ Wettig 2008, p. 20.
Jump up ^ Wettig 2008, pp. 20C21.
Jump up ^ Senn, Alfred Erich, Lithuania 1940 : revolution from above, Amsterdam, New York, Rodopi, 2007 ISBN 978-90-420-2225-6
Jump up ^ Montefiore 2004, p. 334.
^ Jump up to: a b Kennedy-Pipe, Caroline, Stalin's Cold War, New York: Manchester University Press, 1995, ISBN 0-7190-4201-1
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 53.
Jump up ^ Brackman 2001, p. 341.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 58.
Jump up ^ Brackman 2001, pp. 341, 343.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 59.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 63.
Jump up ^ Shirer, p. 778
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 82.
Jump up ^ Harthoorn, R. (2011) Vuile oorlog in Den Haag (Dirty war in The Hague), ISBN 978-90-75879-48-3, p. 96
^ Jump up to: a b Roberts 2006, p. 67.
Jump up ^ Ferguson, Niall (12 June 2005). "Stalin's Intelligence". The New York Times. Retrieved 7 May 2010.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 68.
Jump up ^ Murphy 2006, p. xv.
Jump up ^ Yakovlev, Alexander; Anthony Austin (2004). A Century of Violence in Soviet Russia. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-08760-8.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 89.
^ Jump up to: a b Roberts 2006, p. 90.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, pp. 116C7.
Jump up ^ Glantz, David, The Soviet-German War 1941C45: Myths and Realities: A Survey Essay, 11 October 2001, p. 7
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, pp. 114C115.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 88.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, pp. 117C8.
Jump up ^ Hitler, Adolf; Hugh-Trevor Roper. Hitler's Table Talk 1941C1944, p. 587.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 124.
Jump up ^ Time Magazine, Josef Stalin, 4 January 1943
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 155.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 156.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 159.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 163.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 180.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, p. 185.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, pp. 186C7.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, pp. 194C5.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, pp. 199C201.
Jump up ^ Glantz, David (2001) The Soviet-German War 1941C45: Myths and Realities: A Survey Essay at the Wayback Machine (archived 24 March 2009)
Jump up ^ Beevor, Antony (2005) Berlin: The Downfall 1945, Viking, Penguin Books, ISBN 0-670-88695-5, p. 194
Jump up ^ Williams, Andrew (2005). D-Day to Berlin. Hodder. ISBN 0-340-83397-1., pp. 310C1
Jump up ^ Bullock 1962, pp. 799C800.
Jump up ^ Kershaw, Ian, Hitler, 1936C1945: Nemesis, W. W. Norton & Company, 2001, ISBN 0-393-32252-1, pp. 1038C39
Jump up ^ Dolezal, Robert, "Truth about History: How New Evidence Is Transforming the Story of the Past", Readers Digest, 2004, ISBN 0-7621-0523-2, pp. 185C6
Jump up ^ Hosking, Geoffrey A. (2006). Rulers and victims: the Russians in the Soviet Union. Harvard University Press. p. 242. ISBN 0-674-02178-9
^ Jump up to: a b Glantz, David, The Soviet-German War 1941C45: Myths and Realities: A Survey Essay, 11 October 2001, p. 13
Jump up ^ Smith, J. W. (1994) The World's Wasted Wealth 2: Save Our Wealth, Save Our Environment, p. 204. ISBN 0-9624423-2-1
Jump up ^ Gleason, Abbott (2009). A Companion to Russian History. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 409. ISBN 1-4051-3560-3
Jump up ^ Lee, Stephen J. (2000). European dictatorships, 1918C1945. Routledge. p. 86. ISBN 0-415-23046-2
Jump up ^ Hart, Michael H., The 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Persons in History, Revised and Updated for the Nineties New York: Citadel Press Book, 1992
Jump up ^ "Stalin's Home Gallery". Euroheritage.net. Retrieved 25 June 2010.
Jump up ^ "FAQ". Nobelprize.org. Retrieved 23 December 2015.
Jump up ^ (Polish) obozy jenieckie zolnierzy polskich (Prison camps for Polish soldiers) Encyklopedia PWN. Retrieved 28 November 2006
Jump up ^ (Polish) Edukacja Humanistyczna w wojsku. 1/2005. Dom wydawniczy Wojska Polskiego. ISSN 1734-6584. (Official publication of the Polish Army)
Jump up ^ (Russian)   V    31   ? 250 .? (Please provide translation of the reference title and publication data and means)
Jump up ^ (Russian)       , , p. 367. (Report of the Ukrainian and Belorussian fronts of the Red Army, Melyukhov)
^ Jump up to: a b c Benjamin B. Fischer, "The Katyn Controversy: Stalin's Killing Field", Studies in Intelligence, Winter 1999C2000
Jump up ^ Excerpt from the minutes No. 13 of the Politburo of the Central Committee meeting, shooting order of 5 March 1940 Electronicmuseum.ca at the Wayback Machine (archived 21 September 2005). Retrieved 19 December 2005, original in Russian with English translation
Jump up ^ George Sanford, Katyn and the Soviet massacre of 1940: truth, justice and memory, Routledge, 2005, ISBN 0-415-33873-5 pp. 20C24
Jump up ^ "Stalin's Killing Field" (PDF). Retrieved 19 July 2008.
Jump up ^ (Polish) Various authors. "Kombatant" nr specjalny (148) czerwiec 2003 Archived 3 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Special Edition of Kombatant Bulletin No.148 6/2003 on the occasion of the Year of General Sikorski. Official publication of the Polish government Agency of Combatants and Repressed
Jump up ^ Svyatek; Romuald (1991) " ", - , No.9, ISSN 0042-9058
Jump up ^ Brackman 2001.
Jump up ^ Polak, Barbara (2005). "Zbrodnia katynska" (PDF). Biuletyn IPN (in Polish): 4C21. Retrieved 22 September 2007.
Jump up ^ Engel, David (1993) "Facing a Holocaust: The Polish Government-In-Exile and the Jews, 1943C1945". ISBN 0-8078-2069-5. p. 71
Jump up ^ Bauer, Eddy (1985) "The Marshall Cavendish Illustrated Encyclopedia of World War II". Marshall Cavendish
Jump up ^ Goebbels, Joseph. The Goebbels Diaries (1942C1943). Translated by Louis P. Lochner. Doubleday & Company. 1948
Jump up ^ "Chronology 1990; The Soviet Union and Eastern Europe." Foreign Affairs, 1990, p. 212
Jump up ^ Text of Order No. 270. Stalinism.ru. Retrieved 13 January 2013.
^ Jump up to: a b Roberts 2006, p. 132.
Jump up ^ Krivosheev, G. I. (1997) Soviet Casualties and Combat Losses. Greenhill ISBN 1-85367-280-7
Jump up ^ Gellately 2007, p. 391.
Jump up ^ Rhodes, Richard (2002). Masters of Death: The SS-Einsatzgruppen and the Invention of the Holocaust. New York: Knopf. pp. 46C47. ISBN 0-375-40900-9.
Jump up ^ Paul, Allen (1996) Katyn: Stalin's Massacre and the Seeds of Polish Resurrection, Naval Institute Press, ISBN 1-55750-670-1, p. 155
Jump up ^ Schissler, Hanna The Miracle Years: A Cultural History of West Germany, 1949C1968
Jump up ^ Mark, James, Remembering Rape: Divided Social Memory and the Red Army in Hungary 1944C1945, Past & Present C Number 188, August 2005, p. 133
Jump up ^ Naimark, Norman M., The Russians in Germany: A History of the Soviet Zone of Occupation, 1945C1949. Cambridge: Belknap, 1995, ISBN 0-674-78405-7, pp. 70C71
Jump up ^ Beevor, Antony, Berlin: The Downfall 1945, Penguin Books, 2002, ISBN 0-670-88695-5. Specific reports also include Report of the Swiss legation in Budapest of 1945 and Hubertus Knabe: Tag der Befreiung? Das Kriegsende in Ostdeutschland (A day of liberation? The end of war in Eastern Germany), Propyl?en 2005, ISBN 3-549-07245-7 German)
Jump up ^ "The Soviet special camp No.7 / No. 1 1945C1950". Retrieved 22 April 2009.
Jump up ^ Ex-Death Camp Tells Story Of Nazi and Soviet Horrors The New York Times, 17 December 2001
Jump up ^ Germans Find Mass Graves at an Ex-Soviet Camp The New York Times, 24 September 1992
Jump up ^ Richard Overy, The Dictators Hitler's Germany, Stalin's Russia p.568C569
Jump up ^ Rdiger Overmans, Soldaten hinter Stacheldraht. Deutsche Kriegsgefangene des Zweiten Weltkriege. Ullstein., 2000 Page 246 ISBN 3-549-07121-3
^ Jump up to: a b c Roberts 2006, p. 202.
Jump up ^ "- " ("Military-Historical Magazine"), 1997, No.5. p. 32
Jump up ^  ..      . 1944C1951  //  . 1990. No. 4 (Zemskov V.N. On repatriation of Soviet citizens. Istoriya SSSR., 1990, No.4)
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, pp. 241C244.
^ Jump up to: a b Wettig 2008, pp. 47C8.
^ Jump up to: a b c d 11 February 1945 Potsdam Report, reprinted in Potsdam Ashley, John, Soames Grenville and Bernard Wasserstein, The Major International Treaties of the Twentieth Century: A History and Guide with Texts, Taylor & Francis, 2001 ISBN 0-415-23798-X
Jump up ^ Roberts 2006, pp. 274C5.
^ Jump up to: a b Wettig 2008, pp. 90C1.
Jump up ^ Eden, Anthony (1965). Memoirs: The Reckoning.
Jump up ^ RadchenkoS, Sergey (5 August 2015). "Did Hiroshima Save Japan From Soviet Occupation?". Foreign Policy.com. Retrieved 26 April 2016.
Jump up ^ Muller, James W., Churchill's "Iron Curtain" Speech Fifty Years Later, University of Missouri Press, 1999, ISBN 0-8262-1247-6, pp. 1C8
Jump up ^ Gaddis, John Lewis, We Now Know: Rethinking Cold War History, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 1998, ISBN 0-19-878071-0
Jump up ^ Wettig 2008, pp. 95C100.
Jump up ^ Curp, David (2006) A Clean Sweep?: The Politics of Ethnic Cleansing in Western Poland, 1945C1960, Boydell & Brewer, ISBN 1-58046-238-3, pp. 66C69
Jump up ^ "Poland." Encyclop?dia Britannica. 2007. Encyclop?dia Britannica. Retrieved 7 April 2007
Jump up ^ Buchanan, Tom (2005) Europe's Troubled Peace, 1945C2000: 1945C2000, Blackwell Publishing, ISBN 0-631-22163-8, p.84
Jump up ^ A brief history of Poland: Chapter 13: The Post-War Years, 1945C1990 at the Wayback Machine (archived 9 July 2011). Polonia Today Online. Retrieved 28 March 2007
Jump up ^ Poland C The Historical Setting: Chapter 6: The Polish People's Republic. Polish Academic Information Center, University at Buffalo. Retrieved 14 March 2007
Jump up ^ Sugar, Peter F., Peter Hanak and Tibor Frank, A History of Hungary, Indiana University Press, 1994, ISBN 0-253-20867-X, pp. 375C77
Jump up ^ Matthews, John P. C., Explosion: The Hungarian Revolution of 1956, Hippocrene Books, 2007, ISBN 0-7818-1174-0, pp. 93C4
Jump up ^ Baer, Helmut David, The Struggle of Hungarian Lutherans Under Communism, Texas A&M University Press, 2006 ISBN 1-58544-480-4, p. 16
^ Jump up to: a b c Granville, Johanna, The First Domino: International Decision Making during the Hungarian Crisis of 1956, Texas A&M University Press, 2004. ISBN 1-58544-298-4
Jump up ^ Gati, Charles, Failed Illusions: Moscow, Washington, Budapest, and the 1956 Hungarian Revolt, Stanford University Press, 2006 ISBN 0-8047-5606-6, pp. 9C12
Jump up ^ Wettig 2008, p. 50.
Jump up ^ Germany (East), Library of Congress Country Study, Appendix B: The Council for Mutual Economic Assistance
^ Jump up to: a b Bideleux & Jeffries 1998.
Jump up ^ Stokesbury, James L (1990). A Short History of the Korean War. New York: Harper Perennial. ISBN 0-688-09513-5.
Jump up ^ Douglas J. Macdonald, "Communist Bloc Expansion in the Early Cold War," International Security, Winter 1995-6, p180.
Jump up ^ John Lewis Gaddis, We Know Now: Rethinking Cold War History (Oxford University Press, 1997), p71.
Jump up ^ Sergei N. Goncharov, John W. Lewis and Xue Litai, Uncertain Partners: Stalin, Mao and the Korean War (Stanford University Press, 1993), p213
Jump up ^ William Stueck, The Korean War: An International History (Princeton University Press, 1995), p69.
Jump up ^ Brown, Philip Marshall (1948). "The Recognition of Israel". American Journal of International Law 42 (3): 620. doi:10.2307/2193961.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2002, p. 98.
^ Jump up to: a b c Henig 2005, p. 67.
^ Jump up to: a b Roberts 2002, p. 96.
Jump up ^ Department of State 1948, pp. 80C358.
^ Jump up to: a b c Roberts 2002, p. 97.
Jump up ^ Roberts 2002, p. 100.
Jump up ^ Taubert 2003, p. 318.
Jump up ^ Nekrich, Ulam & Freeze 1997, pp. 202C205.
Jump up ^ Stalin, J. V. (1945). "Toast to the Russian People at a Reception in Honour of Red Army Commanders Given by the Soviet Government in the Kremlin on Thursday, May 24, 1945". In War Speeches, Orders of the Day and Answers to Foreign Correspondents During the Great Patriotic War. Hutchinson & Co., Ltd., London, 1946. Marxists Internet Archive. Retrieved 22 February 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e Ro'i, Yaacov, Jews and Jewish Life in Russia and the Soviet Union, Routledge, 1995, ISBN 0-7146-4619-9, pp. 103C6
Jump up ^ Encyclop?dia Britannica, The Doctors' Plot, 2008
Jump up ^ Brackman 2001, pp. 384C5.
^ Jump up to: a b Stalin's Secret Pogrom: The Postwar Inquisition of the Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee (introduction) by Joshua Rubenstein
Jump up ^ From the diary of Vice-Chair of the Sovmin V.A. Malyshev. See G. Kostyrchenko, Gosudarstvennyj antisemitizm v SSSR, Moscow, 2005, pp. 461, 462
Jump up ^ Brent & Naumov 2004, p. 288.
^ Jump up to: a b Gorlizki, Yoram and Oleg Khlevniuk, Cold Peace: Stalin and the Soviet Ruling Circle 1945C1953, Sourcebooks, Inc., 2005 ISBN 0-19-530420-9, p. 158
^ Jump up to: a b Zuehlke, Jeffrey, Joseph Stalin, Twenty-First Century Books, 2005, ISBN 0-8225-3421-5, pp. 99C101
Jump up ^ "Vicious Spies and Killers under the Mask of Academic Physicians". Pravda. 13 January 1953. Retrieved 1 March 2007.
Jump up ^ Pinkus, Benjamin (1984) The Soviet Government and the Jews 1948C1967: A Documented Study, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-24713-6, pp. 107C8
Jump up ^ Brackman 2001, p. 390.
Jump up ^   : ?  ? at the Wayback Machine (archived 9 November 2010) (Stalin's torture: 'Beat them to death), Novaya Gazeta, 2008. (Russian)
Jump up ^ Montefiore 2007, p. 165.
Jump up ^ Kun, Mikls (2003) Stalin: An Unknown Portrait, Central European University Press, ISBN 963-9241-19-9, p. 287
Jump up ^ Rappaport, Helen, Joseph Stalin: A Biographical Companion, ABC-CLIO, 1999 ISBN 1-57607-084-0, page297
Jump up ^ Brent & Naumov 2004, p. 184.
Jump up ^ Brent & Naumov 2004, p. 295.
^ Jump up to: a b Brackman 2001, p. 388.
Jump up ^ Brent & Naumov 2004, pp. 47C48, 295.
Jump up ^ Eisenstadt, Yaakov, Stalin's Planned Genocide, 22 Adar 5762, 6 March 2002
Jump up ^ Brent & Naumov 2004, pp. 298C300.
Jump up ^ Solzhenitzin, Alexander (1973) The Gulag Archipelago
^ Jump up to: a b Khrushchev, Nikita, Special Report to the 20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union at the Wayback Machine (archived 4 February 2007), Closed session, 24C25 February 1956
Jump up ^ Medvedev, Zhores A. (2006) The unknown Stalin p. 6
Jump up ^ Sebag Montefiore, Simon (4 June 2004). "Why Stalin loved Tarzan and wanted John Wayne shot". The Daily Telegraph (London). Retrieved 24 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "  ". BBC. 25 February 2003.
Jump up ^ Montefiore 2004, p. 634.
^ Jump up to: a b Brent & Naumov 2004.
^ Jump up to: a b "Stalins Tod- das Ende einer Aera". Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk. 3 March 2014. Retrieved 3 March 2014.
Jump up ^ Montefiore 2004, p. 571.
^ Jump up to: a b Faria, M (2011). "Stalin's mysterious death". Surgical Neurology International 2 (1): 161. doi:10.4103/2152-7806.89876. ISSN 2152-7806.
Jump up ^ "Nikolai Getman: The Gulag Collection". The Jamestown Foundation. Retrieved 29 April 2012.
Jump up ^ "How Moscow broke the news of Stalin's death". The Guardian. Retrieved 1 May 2013.
Jump up ^ Li 2009, p. 75.
Jump up ^ Montefiore (2004) p. 548: "Stalin was 'afraid of Beria', thought Khrushchev, 'and would have been glad to get rid of him but didn't know how to do it.' Stalin himself confirmed this, sensing that Beria was winning support ...". Cf. Nikita Khrushchev, Khrushchev remembers, 1971, pp. 250, 311
Jump up ^ Ra'anan, Uri, ed. (2006). Flawed Succession: Russia's Power Transfer Crises. Oxford: Lexington Books. pp. 20C21.
Jump up ^ Stalin Statue Removed from Gori. Civil Georgia. 25 June 2010
Jump up ^ Manfred, A.Z. (ed.). (1974) A Short History of the World in Two Volumes Vol. II. Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp. 108C109.
Jump up ^ Mendelson, Sarah E. and Gerber, Theodore P. (January/February 2006) Failing the Stalin Test. Foreign Affairs
Jump up ^ Walker, Shaun (14 May 2008). "The Big Question: Why is Stalin still popular in Russia, despite the brutality of his regime?". The Independent (UK). Retrieved 23 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Russia: Court Rejects Libel Claim by Stalin's Grandson" Associated Press article in The New York Times 13 October 2009
Jump up ^ Parfitt, Tom (29 December 2008). "Greatest Russian poll". The Guardian (UK). Retrieved 25 June 2010.
^ Jump up to: a b "Resolution on Stalin riles Russia". BBC News. 3 July 2009.
Jump up ^ Galpin, Richard (30 October 2009). "Medvedev blasts Stalin defenders". BBC News. Retrieved 25 June 2010.
Jump up ^ "Putin's view on Crownwell and Stalin "Retrieved 4 October 2014
Jump up ^ "Putin's view on Crownwell and Stalin" Retrieved 4 October 2014
^ Jump up to: a b c d (Russian) [1], RBC Information Systems (25 March 2016)
Jump up ^ "Georgia divided over Stalin 'local hero' status in Gori". BBC News. 5 March 2013.
^ Jump up to: a b c (Ukrainian)   ?  ?  ? Attitude population Ukraine to the figure of Joseph Stalin, Kyiv International Institute of Sociology (1 March 2013)
Jump up ^ Ukraine court finds Bolsheviks guilty of Holodomor genocide, RIA Novosti (13 January 2010)
Yushchenko brings Stalin to court over genocide, RT (14 January 2010)
Yushchenko Praises Guilty Verdict Against Soviet Leaders For Famine, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (14 January 2010)
^ Jump up to: a b Springtime for Stalin by Timothy D. Snyder, The New York Review of Books (26 May 2010)
^ Jump up to: a b Ukraine stands by its view of Stalin as villain C president (Update 1), RIA Novosti (25 February 2011)
Jump up ^ Stalin's victims memorial unveiled outside Kiev, Associated Press (21 September 2012)
Jump up ^ (Ukrainian) About Stalin positive about 1/5 less Ukrainian, Ukrayinska Pravda (4 March 2015)
Jump up ^ "Democrats who love Stalin". Civilnet. 3 April 2013. Retrieved 3 April 2013.
Jump up ^ Robert Himmer. (1986.) "On the Origin and Significance of the Name "Stalin"", Russian Review, 45(3):269-286.
Jump up ^ Montefiore 2007, p. 395.
Jump up ^ "The Human Monster," p. 4. O'Hehir, A. Salon. 5 May 2005
Jump up ^ Rico, Ralph (31 May 1997). "Rethinking Churchill". In Denson, John V. The Costs of War: America's Pyrrhic Victories (1st ed.). New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers. p. 258. ISBN 1-56000-319-7. OCLC 36011765. Retrieved 21 September 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Tolstoy, Nikolai. Stalin's Secret War. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston (1981), ISBN 0-03-047266-0. pp. 19C21. ISBN 0-03-047266-0.
Jump up ^ McCullough, David (9 April 1952). Truman. Simon and Schuster. p. 507. ISBN 978-0-7432-6029-9. Retrieved 25 June 2010.
Jump up ^ "Bronze cast of Stalin's death mask goes for auction". BBC News. 23 January 2012. Retrieved 24 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Montefiore 2004, p. 11.
Jump up ^ "Historical Notes: The Death of Stalin's Son". Time. 1 March 1968. Retrieved 7 May 2010.
Jump up ^ Butler, Desmond (17 December 2001). "Ex-Death Camp Tells Story of Nazi + Soviet Horrors". The New York Times.
Jump up ^ Knipp, Steven (17 December 2006). "George Lenczowski C UC Professor, Middle East Expert". The San Francisco Chronicle.
Jump up ^ Simon Sebag Montefiore "Stalin: Court of the Red Tsar" Random House, 2005 page 226(photo with Stalin, Beria and Lakoba)
Jump up ^ Koba the Dread, p. 133, ISBN 0-7868-6876-7; Stalin: The Man and His Era, p. 354, ISBN 0-8070-7001-7, in a footnote he quotes the press announcement as speaking of her "sudden death"; he also cites pp. 103C105 of his daughter's book, Twenty Letters to a Friend, the Russian edition, New York, 1967
Jump up ^ "Stalin's daughter Lana Peters dies in US of cancer". BBC News. 28 November 2011.
Jump up ^ "Portland granddaughter of Josef Stalin remembers her mother as a talented writer and lecturer in her own right". The Oregonian.
Jump up ^ "Stalin grandson found in Siberia". BBC. 27 March 2001. Retrieved 28 November 2011.
Jump up ^ Tolstoy, Nikolai (1981). Stalin's Secret War. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston. pp. 35C37. ISBN 0-03-047266-0.
^ Jump up to: a b Simon Sebag Montefiore (2004) Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar, Phoenix, London ISBN 978-0-75381-766-7
^ Jump up to: a b Stalin: The First In-depth Biography Based on Explosive New Documents from Russia's Secret Archives, by Edvard Radzinsky, (1997) ISBN 0-385-47954-9, page 437
^ Jump up to: a b McCauley, Martin (2008). Stalin and Stalinism. USA: Pearson Education. p. 92. ISBN 1-4058-7436-8.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Khrushchev, Nikita (2006). "Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR". Memoirs of Nikita Khrushchev, vol. II. USA: Penn State Press. pp. 115C116. ISBN 0-271-02861-0.
Jump up ^ Montefiore 2004, p. 457.
Jump up ^ Montefiore 2004, p. 507.
Jump up ^ Montefiore 2004, p. 86.
Jump up ^ Beevor, Antony (2012). The Second World War. New York: Little, Brown and Company. p. 709. ISBN 9780316023740.
Jump up ^ Avalos, Hector, Fighting Words: The Origins Of Religious Violence. by, p. 325
Jump up ^ Zubok, Vladislav; Pleshakov, Constantine. Inside the Kremlin's Cold War: From Stalin to Khrushchev. p. 4. ISBN 0-674-45531-2.
Jump up ^ Dimitry V. Pospielovsky. A History of Soviet Atheism in Theory, and Practice, and the Believer, vol 1: A History of Marxist-Leninist Atheism and Soviet Anti-Religious Policies, St Martin's Press, New York (1987) p.71
Jump up ^ "Mass crimes against humanity and genocide". Religioustolerance.org. Retrieved 19 October 2008.
Jump up ^ "Was Prejevalsky really the father of Joseph Stalin?". Logoi.com. Retrieved 19 October 2008.
Jump up ^ Smith, Edward Ellis (1967) The Young Stalin. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, p. 77
Jump up ^ Matthew Light (2010). "STALIN'S POLICE: PUBLIC ORDER AND MASS REPRESSION IN THE USSR, 1926C1941 (book review)". Law and Politics Book Review.
Jump up ^ Montefiore, Simon Sebag (19 May 2007). "Before the terror". The Guardian (London). Retrieved 12 April 2011.
Jump up ^ Merkelson, Suzanne (8 April 2011). "Bad Politics, Worse Prose". Foreign Policy. Retrieved 12 April 2011.
References
Applebaum, Anne (2003). Gulag: A History. Doubleday. ISBN 0-7679-0056-1.
Bideleux, Robert; Jeffries, Ian (1998). A History of Eastern Europe: Crisis and Change. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-203-05024-8.
Boobbyer, Phillip (2000). The Stalin Era. Routledge. ISBN 0-7679-0056-1.
Brackman, Roman (2001). The Secret File of Joseph Stalin: A Hidden Life. Frank Cass Publishers. ISBN 0-7146-5050-1.
Brent, Jonathan; Naumov, Vladimir (2004). Stalin's Last Crime: The Plot Against the Jewish Doctors, 1948C1953. HarperCollins. ISBN 0-06-093310-0.
Bullock, Alan (1962). Hitler: A Study in Tyranny. Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-013564-2.
Conquest, Robert (1991): Stalin, Breaker of Nations. First American ed. Viking-Penguin. ISBN 0-670-84089-0
Fest, Joachim C. (2002). Hitler. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 0-15-602754-2.
Gellately, Robert (2007). Lenin, Stalin, and Hitler: The Age of Social Catastrophe. Knopf. ISBN 1-4000-4005-1.
Henig, Ruth Beatrice (2005). The Origins of the Second World War, 1933C41. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-33262-1.
Kotkin, Stephen (2014). Stalin: Paradoxes of Power, 1878C1928. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-713-99944-0.
Li, Hua-yu (Spring 2009). "Reactions of Chinese Citizens to the Death of Stalin: Internal Communist Party Reports". Journal of Cold War Studies 11 (2): 70C88.
Montefiore, Simon Sebag (2003). Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 978-1-842-12726-1.
Montefiore, Simon Sebag (2007). Young Stalin. Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-85068-7.
Murphy, David E. (2006). What Stalin Knew: The Enigma of Barbarossa. Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-11981-X.
Overy, R. J. (2004). The Dictators: Hitler's Germany and Stalin's Russia. W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 0-393-02030-4.
Nekrich, Aleksandr Moiseevich; Ulam, Adam Bruno; Freeze, Gregory L. (1997). Pariahs, Partners, Predators: German-Soviet Relations, 1922C1941. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-10676-9.
Roberts, Geoffrey (1992). "The Soviet Decision for a Pact with Nazi Germany". Soviet Studies (Taylor & Francis, Ltd.) 55 (2): 57C78. doi:10.1080/09668139208411994. JSTOR 152247.
Roberts, Geoffrey (2002). "Stalin, the Pact with Nazi Germany, and the Origins of Postwar Soviet Diplomatic Historiography" 4 (4).
Roberts, Geoffrey (2006). Stalin's Wars: From World War to Cold War, 1939C1953. Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-11204-1.
Service, Robert (2004). Stalin:A Biography. London: Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-72627-3.
Soviet Information Bureau (1948). "Falsifiers of History (Historical Survey)". Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House. 272848.
Department of State (1948). "Nazi-Soviet Relations, 1939C1941: Documents from the Archives of The German Foreign Office". Department of State.
Taubert, Fritz (2003). The Myth of Munich. Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag. ISBN 3-486-56673-3.
Tucker, Robert C. (1992). Stalin in Power: The Revolution from Above, 1928C1941. W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 0-393-30869-3.
Wegner, Bernd (1997). From Peace to War: Germany, Soviet Russia, and the World, 1939-1941. Berghahn Books. ISBN 9781571818829.
Wettig, Gerhard (2008). Stalin and the Cold War in Europe. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 0-7425-5542-9.
External links
Find more about
Joseph Stalin
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Search Wiktionary	Definitions from Wiktionary
Search Commons	Media from Commons
Search Wikiquote	Quotations from Wikiquote
Search Wikisource	Texts from Wikisource
Search Wikidata	Data from Wikidata
Stalin Library (with all 13 volumes of Stalin's works and "volume 14")
Library of Congress: Revelations from the Russian Archives
Electronic archive of Stalin's letters and presentations
ollection of songs about Stalin in different languages (another version)
Stalin digital archive
Sovetika.ru C A site about the Soviet era (Russian)
"The Revolution Betrayed" by Leon Trotsky
Stalin Biography from Spartacus Educational
A List of Key Documentary Material on Stalin
"Stalin and the Struggle for Democratic Reform, Part One" and "Part Two" by Grover Furr.
Stalinka: The Digital Library of Staliniana
Modern History Sourcebook: Stalin's Reply to Churchill, 1946
Modern History Sourcebook: Nikita S. Khrushchev: The Secret Speech C On the Cult of Personality, 1956
The political economy of Stalinism: evidence from the Soviet secret archives / Paul R. Gregory
"Demographic catastrophes of the 20th century", chapter from Demographic Modernization in Russia 1900C2000, ed. A. G. Vishnevsky, 2006 ISBN 5-98379-042-0 C estimates of the human cost of Stalin's rule
Annotated bibliography for Joseph Stalin from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues
"Secret documents reveal Stalin was poisoned" study by the Russian paper Pravda of events behind possible death by poisoning
Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Current Intelligence. Death of Stalin at the Wayback Machine (archived 8 March 2012), 16 July 1953.
How Many Did Stalin Really Murder? by Professor R.J. Rummel
The Harvest of Sorrow: Soviet Collectivization and the Terror-Famine (1986)
Hitler vs. Stalin: Who Was Worse? by Timothy Snyder
Untold History: Stalin, the Soviet Union and WWII. Interview with Peter Kuznick on The Real News. 14 January 2013
Joseph Stalin at the Internet Movie Database
Political offices
Preceded by
Vyacheslav Molotov	Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union
Council of People's Commissars until 1946
1941C1953	Succeeded by
Georgy Malenkov
Preceded by
Semyon Timoshenko	Minister of Defence of the Soviet Union
People's Commissar until 1946
1941C1947	Succeeded by
Nikolai Bulganin
Party political offices
Preceded by
None	General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
1922C1953	Succeeded by
Nikita Khrushchev
[show] 
Articles and topics related to Joseph Stalin
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 101787139 LCCN: n80044789 ISNI: 0000 0001 2145 7825 GND: 118642499 SELIBR: 198411 SUDOC: 027147029 BNF: cb11925406n (data) MusicBrainz: 835254cb-e7ee-43ed-a751-c96ba5543f36 NLA: 35519349 NDL: 00457429 NKC: jn19990210582 ICCU: IT\ICCU\RAVV\031308 BNE: XX893792
Categories: Joseph Stalin1878 births1953 deathsPeople from Gori, GeorgiaPeople from Tiflis GovernorateRussian Social Democratic Labour Party membersOld BolsheviksHeads of the Communist Party of the Soviet UnionPolitburo of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union membersHeads of government of the Soviet UnionSoviet Ministers of DefenceGeneralissimosMarshals of the Soviet UnionAnti-fascistsAnti-RevisionistsAnti-nationalistsAntisemitism in RussiaAtheism activistsBank robbersComintern peopleCommunist poetsCommunists from Georgia (country)Former Georgian Orthodox ChristiansInternational opponents of apartheid in South AfricaGreat Purge perpetratorsHolodomor perpetratorsHonorary Members of the USSR Academy of SciencesMarxist theoristsPeople of the Russian Civil WarPeople of the Russian RevolutionPeople of World War II from Georgia (country)19th-century poets from Georgia (country)Politicians from Georgia (country)Russian exilesHeroes of the Soviet UnionHeroes of Socialist LabourRecipients of the Order of VictoryRecipients of the Order of the Red BannerRecipients of the Order of LeninRecipients of the Order of Suvorov, 1st classRecipients of the Order of SukhbaatarHeroes of the Mongolian People's RepublicRecipients of the Order of the Red StarRecipients of the Czechoslovak War CrossCollars of the Order of the White LionSmallpox survivorsSoviet people of World War IIWorld War II political leadersBurials at the Kremlin Wall NecropolisAcademics from Georgia (country)Russian atheistsCritics of religionsPeople of the PolishCSoviet WarRussian revolutionariesStalinismPeople of the Cold WarSoviet politiciansGenocide perpetratorsCommunism in Russia20th-century poets from Georgia (country)Male poets from Georgia (country)
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikisource
Languages
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
????
?nglisc
???????
Aragons
?????
Asturianu
Az?rbaycanca
??????
?????
Ban-lam-g
?

 (?)?
Bikol Central

Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg

Catal
?
Cebuano
?e?tina
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
?
Espa?ol
Esperanto
Estreme?u
Euskara
?????
Fiji Hindi
F?royskt
Fran?ais
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gidhlig
Galego
MZ
???????
Z/Hak-ka-ng?
???
???????
??????
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua

IsiZulu
slenska
Italiano
?????
Basa Jawa
?????
???????
??
Kernowek
Kiswahili
Kurd?


???? ??????
Latina
Latvie?u
L?tzebuergesch
Lietuvi?
Limburgs
La .lojban.
Lumbaart
Magyar

Malagasy
??????
Malti
?????
?????????
????
????????
Bahasa Melayu
Mng-d??ng-ng??
Mirands

??????????
Nederlands
??????
????? ????
Z
Napulitano

Norsk bokm?l
Norsk nynorsk
Occitan
 
O?zbekcha/?
??????
??????
Papiamentu
????
Patois
Piemontis
Polski
Portugus
Qaraqalpaqsha
Roman?
Runa Simi


 
?????????
Sardu
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
????
Sloven?ina
Sloven??ina
?l?nski
?????? ???????
 / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / 
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
?????
/tatar?a
??????
???
??
Trk?e
?
????
???????? / Uyghurche
Vahcuengh
Ti?ng Vi?t
V?ro
Walon

Winaray

??????
Yorb
Z
Zazaki
?emait??ka

??????
Edit links
This page was last modified on 28 July 2016, at 03:12.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
 Page semi-protected
Bible
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Bible (disambiguation).
"Biblical" redirects here. For the song by Biffy Clyro, see Biblical (song).

The Gutenberg Bible, the first printed Bible
Part of a series on the
Bible
The Malmesbury Bible
Canons and books
[show]
Authorship and development
[show]
Translations and manuscripts
[show]
Biblical studies[show]
Interpretation[show]
Perspectives[show]
Wikipedia book Bible book     Bible portal
v t e
The Bible (from Koine Greek ? ?, t bibla, "the books"[1] ) is a collection of texts sacred in Judaism and Christianity. It is a collection of scriptures written at different times by different authors in different locations. Jews and Christians consider the books of the Bible to be a product of divine inspiration or an authoritative record of the relationship between God and humans.

The canonical Bible varies depending on traditions or groups; a number of Bible canons have evolved, with overlapping and diverging contents.[2] The Christian Old Testament overlaps with the Hebrew Bible and the Greek Septuagint; the Hebrew Bible is known in Judaism as the Tanakh. The New Testament is a collection of writings by early Christians, believed to be mostly Jewish disciples of Christ, written in first-century Koine Greek. These early Christian Greek writings consist of narratives, letters, and apocalyptic writings. Among Christian denominations there is some disagreement about the contents of the canon, primarily in the Apocrypha, a list of works that are regarded with varying levels of respect.

Attitudes towards the Bible also vary amongst Christian groups. Roman Catholics, Anglicans and Eastern Orthodox Christians stress the harmony and importance of the Bible and sacred tradition, while Protestant churches focus on the idea of sola scriptura, or scripture alone. This concept arose during the Protestant Reformation, and many denominations today continue to support the use of the Bible as the only source of Christian teaching.

With estimated total sales of over 5 billion copies, the Bible is widely considered to be the best-selling book of all time.[3][4] It has estimated annual sales of 100 million copies,[5][6] and has been a major influence on literature and history, especially in the West where the Gutenberg Bible was the first mass-printed book. It was the first book ever printed using movable type.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Etymology
1.1	Textual history
2	Development
3	Hebrew Bible
3.1	Torah
3.2	Nevi'im
3.3	Ketuvim
3.4	Original languages
4	Septuagint
4.1	Incorporations from Theodotion
4.2	Final form
5	Christian Bibles
5.1	Old Testament
5.2	New Testament
5.3	Development of the Christian canons
6	Divine inspiration
7	Versions and translations
8	Views
8.1	Other religions
8.2	Biblical studies
8.3	Higher criticism
9	Archaeological and historical research
10	Bibles Gallery
11	Illustrations
12	See also
13	Endnotes
14	References and further reading
Etymology
The English word Bible is from the Latin biblia, from the same word in Medieval Latin and Late Latin and ultimately from Koine Greek ? ? ta biblia "the books" (singular ? biblion).[7]

Medieval Latin biblia is short for biblia sacra "holy book", while biblia in Greek and Late Latin is neuter plural (gen. bibliorum). It gradually came to be regarded as a feminine singular noun (biblia, gen. bibliae) in medieval Latin, and so the word was loaned as a singular into the vernaculars of Western Europe.[8] Latin biblia sacra "holy books" translates Greek ? ? ? ? ta biblia ta hagia, "the holy books".[9]

The word ? itself had the literal meaning of "paper" or "scroll" and came to be used as the ordinary word for "book". It is the diminutive of ?? byblos, "Egyptian papyrus", possibly so called from the name of the Phoenician sea port Byblos (also known as Gebal) from whence Egyptian papyrus was exported to Greece. The Greek ta biblia (lit. "little papyrus books")[10] was "an expression Hellenistic Jews used to describe their sacred books (the Septuagint).[11][12] Christian use of the term can be traced to c. 223 CE.[7] The biblical scholar F.F. Bruce notes that Chrysostom appears to be the first writer (in his Homilies on Matthew, delivered between 386 and 388) to use the Greek phrase ta biblia ("the books") to describe both the Old and New Testaments together.[13]

Textual history
By the 2nd century BCE, Jewish groups had called the Bible books the "scriptures" and referred to them as "holy," or in Hebrew ???????? ????????? (Kitvei hakkodesh), and Christians now commonly call the Old and New Testaments of the Christian Bible "The Holy Bible" (in Greek ? ? ? ?, t bibla t gia) or "the Holy Scriptures" ( ? ?, e Aga Graph?).[14] The Bible was divided into chapters in the 13th century by Stephen Langton and into verses in the 16th century by French printer Robert Estienne[15] and is now usually cited by book, chapter, and verse.

The oldest extant copy of a complete Bible is an early 4th-century parchment book preserved in the Vatican Library, and known as the Codex Vaticanus. The oldest copy of the Tanakh in Hebrew and Aramaic dates to the 10th century CE. The oldest copy of a complete Latin (Vulgate) Bible is the Codex Amiatinus, dating from the 8th century.[16]

Development

The Kennicott Bible, by Benjamin Kennicott, with illustration, Jonah being swallowed by the fish, 1476
See also: Authorship of the Bible
Professor John K. Riches, Professor of Divinity and Biblical Criticism at the University of Glasgow, in an Oxford University Press introduction to the Bible, says that "the biblical texts themselves are the result of a creative dialogue between ancient traditions and different communities through the ages",[17] and "the biblical texts were produced over a period in which the living conditions of the writers C political, cultural, economic, and ecological C varied enormously".[18] Timothy H. Lim, a professor of Hebrew Bible and Second Temple Judaism at the University of Edinburgh, says that the Old Testament is "a collection of authoritative texts of apparently divine origin that went through a human process of writing and editing."[19] He states that it is not a magical book, nor was it literally written by God and passed to mankind. Parallel to the solidification of the Hebrew canon (c. 3rd century BCE), only the Torah first and then the Tanakh began to be translated into Greek and expanded, now referred to as the Septuagint or the Greek Old Testament.[20]

In Christian Bibles, the New Testament Gospels were derived from oral traditions in the second half of the first century CE. Riches says that:

Scholars have attempted to reconstruct something of the history of the oral traditions behind the Gospels, but the results have not been too encouraging. The period of transmission is short: less than 40 years passed between the death of Jesus and the writing of Mark's Gospel. This means that there was little time for oral traditions to assume fixed form.[21]

The Bible was later translated into Latin and other languages. John Riches states that:

The translation of the Bible into Latin marks the beginning of a parting of the ways between Western Latin-speaking Christianity and Eastern Christianity, which spoke Greek, Syriac, Coptic, Ethiopic, and other languages. The Bibles of the Eastern Churches vary considerably: the Ethiopic Orthodox canon includes 81 books and contains many apocalyptic texts, such as were found at Qumran and subsequently excluded from the Jewish canon. As a general rule, one can say that the Orthodox Churches generally follow the Septuagint in including more books in their Old Testaments than are in the Jewish canon.[21]

Hebrew Bible
Tanakh
Joshua 1:1 as recorded in the Aleppo Codex
Torah  (Instruction)[show]
Nevi'im  (Prophets)[show]
Ketuvim  (Writings)[show]
v t e
Main article: Development of the Hebrew Bible canon

The Nash Papyrus (2nd century BCE) contains a portion of a pre-Masoretic Text, specifically the Ten Commandments and the Shema Yisrael prayer.
The Masoretic Text is the authoritative Hebrew text of the Hebrew Bible, or Tanakh. It defines the books of the Jewish canon, and also the precise letter-text of these biblical books, with their vocalization and accentuation.

The oldest extant manuscripts of the Masoretic Text date from approximately the 9th century CE,[22] and the Aleppo Codex (once the oldest complete copy of the Masoretic Text, but now missing its Torah section) dates from the 10th century.

The name Tanakh (Hebrew: ??"?) reflects the threefold division of the Hebrew Scriptures, Torah ("Teaching"), Nevi'im ("Prophets") and Ketuvim ("Writings").

Torah
Main article: Torah
See also: Oral Torah
The Torah (???????) is also known as the "Five Books of Moses" or the Pentateuch, meaning "five scroll-cases".[23]

The Hebrew names of the books are derived from the first words in the respective texts. The Torah consists of the following five books:

Genesis, Beresheeth (??????)
Exodus, Shemot (????)
Leviticus, Vayikra (?????)
Numbers, Bamidbar (?????)
Deuteronomy, Devarim (?????)
The first eleven chapters of Genesis provide accounts of the creation (or ordering) of the world and the history of God's early relationship with humanity. The remaining thirty-nine chapters of Genesis provide an account of God's covenant with the Biblical patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob (also called Israel) and Jacob's children, the "Children of Israel", especially Joseph. It tells of how God commanded Abraham to leave his family and home in the city of Ur, eventually to settle in the land of Canaan, and how the Children of Israel later moved to Egypt. The remaining four books of the Torah tell the story of Moses, who lived hundreds of years after the patriarchs. He leads the Children of Israel from slavery in Ancient Egypt to the renewal of their covenant with God at Mount Sinai and their wanderings in the desert until a new generation was ready to enter the land of Canaan. The Torah ends with the death of Moses.[24]

The Torah contains the commandments of God, revealed at Mount Sinai (although there is some debate among traditional scholars as to whether these were all written down at one time, or over a period of time during the 40 years of the wanderings in the desert, while several modern Jewish movements reject the idea of a literal revelation, and critical scholars believe that many of these laws developed later in Jewish history).[25][26][27][28] These commandments provide the basis for Jewish religious law. Tradition states that there are 613 commandments (taryag mitzvot).

Nevi'im
Main article: Nevi'im
Books of Nevi'im
 
Former Prophets
Joshua Judges Samuel Kings
Latter Prophets (major)
Isaiah Jeremiah Ezekiel
Latter Prophets (Twelve minor)
Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi
Hebrew Bible
v t e
Nevi'im (Hebrew: ????????? N???'?m??, "Prophets") is the second main division of the Tanakh, between the Torah and Ketuvim. It contains two sub-groups, the Former Prophets (Nevi'im Rishonim ?????? ???????, the narrative books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings) and the Latter Prophets (Nevi'im Aharonim ?????? ???????, the books of Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel and the Twelve Minor Prophets).

The Nevi'im tell the story of the rise of the Hebrew monarchy and its division into two kingdoms, ancient Israel and Judah, focusing on conflicts between the Israelites and other nations, and conflicts among Israelites, specifically, struggles between believers in "the LORD God"[29] and believers in foreign gods,[30][31] and the criticism of unethical and unjust behavior of Israelite elites and rulers;[32][33][34] in which prophets played a crucial and leading role. It ends with the conquest of the Kingdom of Israel by the Assyrians followed by the conquest of the Kingdom of Judah by the Babylonians and the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem.

Former Prophets
The Former Prophets are the books Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings. They contain narratives that begin immediately after the death of Moses with the divine appointment of Joshua as his successor, who then leads the people of Israel into the Promised Land, and end with the release from imprisonment of the last king of Judah. Treating Samuel and Kings as single books, they cover:

Joshua's conquest of the land of Canaan (in the Book of Joshua),
the struggle of the people to possess the land (in the Book of Judges),
the people's request to God to give them a king so that they can occupy the land in the face of their enemies (in the Books of Samuel)
the possession of the land under the divinely appointed kings of the House of David, ending in conquest and foreign exile (Books of Kings)
Latter Prophets
The Latter Prophets are divided into two groups, the "major" prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel, and the Twelve Minor Prophets, collected into a single book. The collection is broken up to form twelve individual books in the Christian Old Testament, one for each of the prophets:

Hosea, Hoshea (????)
Joel, Yoel (????)
Amos, Amos (????)
Obadiah, Ovadyah (?????)
Jonah, Yonah (????)
Micah, Mikhah (????)
Nahum, Nahum (????)
Habakkuk, Havakuk (?????)
Zephaniah, Tsefanya (?????)
Haggai, Khagay (???)
Zechariah, Zekharyah (?????)
Malachi, Malakhi (?????)
Ketuvim
Main article: Ketuvim
Books of the Ketuvim
 
Three poetic books
Psalms Proverbs Job
Five Megillot (Scrolls)
Song of Songs Ruth Lamentations Ecclesiastes Esther
Other books
Daniel
EzraCNehemiah (Ezra Nehemiah)
Chronicles
Hebrew Bible
v t e
Ketuvim or K?????m (in Biblical Hebrew: ???????????? "writings") is the third and final section of the Tanakh. The Ketuvim are believed to have been written under the Ruach HaKodesh (the Holy Spirit) but with one level less authority than that of prophecy.[35]

The poetic books
In Masoretic manuscripts (and some printed editions), Psalms, Proverbs and Job are presented in a special two-column form emphasizing the parallel stichs in the verses, which are a function of their poetry. Collectively, these three books are known as Sifrei Emet (an acronym of the titles in Hebrew, ????, ????, ????? yields Emet ??"?, which is also the Hebrew for "truth").

These three books are also the only ones in Tanakh with a special system of cantillation notes that are designed to emphasize parallel stichs within verses. However, the beginning and end of the book of Job are in the normal prose system.

The five scrolls (Hamesh Megillot)
The five relatively short books of Song of Songs, Book of Ruth, the Book of Lamentations, Ecclesiastes and Book of Esther are collectively known as the Hamesh Megillot (Five Megillot). These are the latest books collected and designated as "authoritative" in the Jewish canon even though they were not complete until the 2nd century CE.[36]

Other books
Besides the three poetic books and the five scrolls, the remaining books in Ketuvim are Daniel, EzraCNehemiah and Chronicles. Although there is no formal grouping for these books in the Jewish tradition, they nevertheless share a number of distinguishing characteristics:

Their narratives all openly describe relatively late events (i.e., the Babylonian captivity and the subsequent restoration of Zion).
The Talmudic tradition ascribes late authorship to all of them.
Two of them (Daniel and Ezra) are the only books in the Tanakh with significant portions in Aramaic.
Order of the books

Coloured title page from the Bishops' Bible quarto edition of 1569, the British Museum. Queen Elizabeth sits in the centre on her throne. The words on the four columns read justice, mercy, fortitude and prudence, attributing these traits to the queen. Text at the bottom reads "God Save the Queene".
The following list presents the books of Ketuvim in the order they appear in most printed editions. It also divides them into three subgroups based on the distinctiveness of Sifrei Emet and Hamesh Megillot.

The Three Poetic Books (Sifrei Emet)

Tehillim (Psalms) ?????????
Mishlei (Book of Proverbs) ???????
Iyy?bh (Book of Job) ???????
The Five Megillot (Hamesh Megillot)

Shr Hashshrm (Song of Songs) or (Song of Solomon) ????? ???????????? (Passover)
Rth (Book of Ruth) ???? (Shbh??th)
Eikhah (Lamentations) ???? (Ninth of Av) [Also called Kinnot in Hebrew.]
Qheleth (Ecclesiastes) ???? (Sukk?th)
Estr (Book of Esther) ??????? (P?r?m)
Other books

Dn?l (Book of Daniel) ??????????
Ezr (Book of Ezra-Book of Nehemiah) ????
Divrei ha-Yamim (Chronicles) ???? ?????
The Jewish textual tradition never finalized the order of the books in Ketuvim. The Babylonian Talmud (Bava Batra 14b-15a) gives their order as Ruth, Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, Lamentations of Jeremiah, Daniel, Scroll of Esther, Ezra, Chronicles.[37]

In Tiberian Masoretic codices, including the Aleppo Codex and the Leningrad Codex, and often in old Spanish manuscripts as well, the order is Chronicles, Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ruth, Song of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, Lamentations of Jeremiah, Esther, Daniel, Ezra.[38]

Canonization
The Ketuvim is the last of the three portions of the Tanakh to have been accepted as biblical canon. While the Torah may have been considered canon by Israel as early as the 5th century BCE and the Former and Latter Prophets were canonized by the 2nd century BCE, the Ketuvim was not a fixed canon until the 2nd century of the Common Era.[39]

Evidence suggests, however, that the people of Israel were adding what would become the Ketuvim to their holy literature shortly after the canonization of the prophets. As early as 132 BCE references suggest that the Ketuvim was starting to take shape, although it lacked a formal title.[40] References in the four Gospels as well as other books of the New Testament indicate that many of these texts were both commonly known and counted as having some degree of religious authority early in the 1st century CE.

Many scholars believe that the limits of the Ketuvim as canonized scripture were determined by the Council of Jamnia c. 90 CE. Against Apion, the writing of Josephus in 95 CE, treated the text of the Hebrew Bible as a closed canon to which "... no one has ventured either to add, or to remove, or to alter a syllable..."[41] For a long time following this date the divine inspiration of Esther, the Song of Songs, and Ecclesiastes was often under scrutiny.[42]

Original languages
The Tanakh was mainly written in biblical Hebrew, with some small portions (Ezra 4:8C6:18 and 7:12C26, Jeremiah 10:11, Daniel 2:4C7:28) in biblical Aramaic, a sister language which became the lingua franca for much of the Semitic world.[43]

Septuagint
Main article: Septuagint
The Septuagint, or LXX, is a translation of the Hebrew Scriptures and some related texts into Koine Greek, begun in the late 3rd century BCE and completed by 132 BCE,[44][45][46] initially in Alexandria, but in time elsewhere as well.[47] It is not altogether clear which was translated when, or where; some may even have been translated twice, into different versions, and then revised.[48]

As the work of translation progressed, the canon of the Greek Bible expanded. The Torah always maintained its pre-eminence as the basis of the canon but the collection of prophetic writings, based on the Nevi'im, had various hagiographical works incorporated into it. In addition, some newer books were included in the Septuagint, among these are the Maccabees and the Wisdom of Sirach. However, the book of Sirach, is now known to have existed in a Hebrew version, since ancient Hebrew manuscripts of it were rediscovered in modern times. The Septuagint version of some Biblical books, like Daniel and Esther, are longer than those in the Jewish canon.[49] Some of these deuterocanonical books (e.g. the Wisdom of Solomon, and the second book of Maccabees) were not translated, but composed directly in Greek.[citation needed]

Since Late Antiquity, once attributed to a hypothetical late 1st-century Council of Jamnia, mainstream Rabbinic Judaism rejected the Septuagint as valid Jewish scriptural texts. Several reasons have been given for this. First, some mistranslations were claimed. Second, the Hebrew source texts used for the Septuagint differed from the Masoretic tradition of Hebrew texts, which was chosen as canonical by the Jewish rabbis.[50] Third, the rabbis wanted to distinguish their tradition from the newly emerging tradition of Christianity.[46][51] Finally, the rabbis claimed a divine authority for the Hebrew language, in contrast to Aramaic or Greek C even though these languages were the lingua franca of Jews during this period (and Aramaic would eventually be given a holy language status comparable to Hebrew).[52]

The Septuagint is the basis for the Old Latin, Slavonic, Syriac, Old Armenian, Old Georgian and Coptic versions of the Christian Old Testament.[53] The Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches use most of the books of the Septuagint, while Protestant churches usually do not. After the Protestant Reformation, many Protestant Bibles began to follow the Jewish canon and exclude the additional texts, which came to be called Biblical apocrypha. The Apocrypha are included under a separate heading in the King James Version of the Bible, the basis for the Revised Standard Version.[54]

Incorporations from Theodotion
In most ancient copies of the Bible which contain the Septuagint version of the Old Testament, the Book of Daniel is not the original Septuagint version, but instead is a copy of Theodotion's translation from the Hebrew, which more closely resembles the Masoretic Text.[citation needed] The Septuagint version was discarded in favour of Theodotion's version in the 2nd to 3rd centuries CE. In Greek-speaking areas, this happened near the end of the 2nd century, and in Latin-speaking areas (at least in North Africa), it occurred in the middle of the 3rd century. History does not record the reason for this, and St. Jerome reports, in the preface to the Vulgate version of Daniel, "This thing 'just' happened."[55] One of two Old Greek texts of the Book of Daniel has been recently rediscovered and work is ongoing in reconstructing the original form of the book.[56]

The canonical EzraCNehemiah is known in the Septuagint as "Esdras B", and 1 Esdras is "Esdras A". 1 Esdras is a very similar text to the books of EzraCNehemiah, and the two are widely thought by scholars to be derived from the same original text. It has been proposed, and is thought highly likely by scholars, that "Esdras B" C the canonical EzraCNehemiah C is Theodotion's version of this material, and "Esdras A" is the version which was previously in the Septuagint on its own.[55]

Final form
Some texts are found in the Septuagint but are not present in the Hebrew. These additional books are Tobit, Judith, Wisdom of Solomon, Wisdom of Jesus son of Sirach, Baruch, the Letter of Jeremiah (which later became chapter 6 of Baruch in the Vulgate), additions to Daniel (The Prayer of Azarias, the Song of the Three Children, Susanna and Bel and the Dragon), additions to Esther, 1 Maccabees, 2 Maccabees, 3 Maccabees, 4 Maccabees, 1 Esdras, Odes, including the Prayer of Manasseh, the Psalms of Solomon, and Psalm 151.

Some books that are set apart in the Masoretic Text are grouped together. For example, the Books of Samuel and the Books of Kings are in the LXX one book in four parts called ? ("Of Reigns"). In LXX, the Books of Chronicles supplement Reigns and it is called Paralipomenon (?things left out). The Septuagint organizes the minor prophets as twelve parts of one Book of Twelve.[56]

The Orthodox
Old Testament[47][57][58]	Greek-based
name	Conventional
English name
Law
??	Gnesis	Genesis
??	xodos	Exodus
??	Leuitikn	Leviticus
??	Arithmo	Numbers
?	Deuteronmion	Deuteronomy
History
??? N?	Isous Nau	Joshua
?	Krita	Judges
??	Roth	Ruth
? ?[59]	I Reigns	I Samuel
? ?	II Reigns	II Samuel
? ?	III Reigns	I Kings
? ?	IV Reigns	II Kings
? ?	I Paralipomenon[60]	I Chronicles
? ?	II Paralipomenon	II Chronicles
?? ?	I Esdras	1 Esdras
?? ?	II Esdras	EzraCNehemiah
?[61]	Tobit	Tobit or Tobias
??	Ioudith	Judith
??	Esther	Esther with additions
? ?	I Makkabaioi	1 Maccabees
? ?	II Makkabaioi	2 Maccabees
? ?	III Makkabaioi	3 Maccabees
Wisdom
?	Psalms	Psalms
?? ?	Psalm 151	Psalm 151
? ?	Prayer of Manasseh	Prayer of Manasseh
??	Ib	Job
?	Proverbs	Proverbs
???	Ekklesiastes	Ecclesiastes
? ??	Song of Songs	Song of Solomon or Canticles
? o??	Wisdom of Solomon	Wisdom
? ?? ?	Wisdom of Jesus the son of Seirach	Sirach or Ecclesiasticus
? o??	Psalms of Solomon	Psalms of Solomon[62]
Prophets
?	The Twelve	Minor Prophets
?? ?	I. Os?e	Hosea
??? ?	II. Ams	Amos
?? ?	III. Michaias	Micah
?? ?	IV. Io?l	Joel
?? ?[63]	V. Obdias	Obadiah
??? ?'	VI. Ionas	Jonah
? ?	VII. Naoum	Nahum
?? ?	VIII. Ambakum	Habakkuk
?? ?	IX. Sophonias	Zephaniah
??? ?	X. Angaios	Haggai
?? ?	XI. Zacharias	Zachariah
?? ?	XII. Messenger	Malachi
???	Hesaias	Isaiah
???	Hieremias	Jeremiah
?	Baruch	Baruch
?	Lamentations	Lamentations
?? ?	Epistle of Jeremiah	Letter of Jeremiah
??	Iezekil	Ezekiel
?	Danil	Daniel with additions
Appendix
? ' ?	IV Makkabees	4 Maccabees[64]
Christian Bibles
Part of a series on
Christianity
Jesus depicted as the Good Shepherd
Jesus Christ
[show]
Bible Foundations
[show]
Theology[show]
History Tradition
[show]
Related topics[show]
Denominations Groups
[show]
Christian cross Christianity portal
v t e
Main articles: Christian biblical canons and List of English Bible translations

The Bible translated into German by Martin Luther

A page from the Gutenberg Bible
A Christian Bible is a set of books that a Christian denomination regards as divinely inspired and thus constituting scripture. Although the Early Church primarily used the Septuagint or the Targums among Aramaic speakers, the apostles did not leave a defined set of new scriptures; instead the canon of the New Testament developed over time. Groups within Christianity include differing books as part of their sacred writings, most prominent among which are the biblical apocrypha or deuterocanonical books.

Significant versions of the English Christian Bible include the Douay-Rheims Bible, the Authorized King James Version, the English Revised Version, the American Standard Version, the Revised Standard Version, the New American Standard Version, the New King James Version, the New International Version, and the English Standard Version.

Old Testament
Main article: Old Testament
The books which make up the Christian Old Testament differ between the Catholic (see Catholic Bible), Orthodox, and Protestant (see Protestant Bible) churches, with the Protestant movement accepting only those books contained in the Hebrew Bible, while Catholics and Orthodox have wider canons. A few groups consider particular translations to be divinely inspired, notably the Greek Septuagint and the Aramaic Peshitta.[citation needed]

Apocryphal or deuterocanonical books

The Isaiah scroll, which is a part of the Dead Sea Scrolls, contains almost the whole Book of Isaiah. It dates from the 2nd century BCE.
In Eastern Christianity, translations based on the Septuagint still prevail. The Septuagint was generally abandoned in favour of the 10th-century Masoretic Text as the basis for translations of the Old Testament into Western languages.[citation needed] Some modern Western translations since the 14th century make use of the Septuagint to clarify passages in the Masoretic Text, where the Septuagint may preserve a variant reading of the Hebrew text.[citation needed] They also sometimes adopt variants that appear in other texts, e.g., those discovered among the Dead Sea Scrolls.[65][66]

A number of books which are part of the Peshitta or Greek Septuagint but are not found in the Hebrew (Rabbinic) Bible (i.e., among the protocanonical books) are often referred to as deuterocanonical books by Roman Catholics referring to a later secondary (i.e., deutero) canon, that canon as fixed definitively by the Council of Trent 1545C1563.[67][68] It includes 46 books for the Old Testament (45 if Jeremiah and Lamentations are counted as one) and 27 for the New.[69]

Most Protestants term these books as apocrypha. Modern Protestant traditions do not accept the deuterocanonical books as canonical, although Protestant Bibles included them in Apocrypha sections until the 1820s. However, Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches include these books as part of their Old Testament.

The Roman Catholic Church recognizes:[70]

Tobit
Judith
1 Maccabees
2 Maccabees
Wisdom
Sirach (or Ecclesiasticus)
Baruch
The Letter of Jeremiah (Baruch Chapter 6)
Greek Additions to Esther (Book of Esther, chapters 10:4 C 12:6)
The Prayer of Azariah and Song of the Three Holy Children verses 1C68 (Book of Daniel, chapter 3, verses 24C90)
Susanna (Book of Daniel, chapter 13)
Bel and the Dragon (Book of Daniel, chapter 14)
In addition to those, the Greek and Russian Orthodox Churches recognize the following:[citation needed]

3 Maccabees
1 Esdras
Prayer of Manasseh
Psalm 151
Russian and Georgian Orthodox Churches include:[citation needed]

2 Esdras i.e., Latin Esdras in the Russian and Georgian Bibles
There is also 4 Maccabees which is only accepted as canonical in the Georgian Church, but was included by St. Jerome in an appendix to the Vulgate, and is an appendix to the Greek Orthodox Bible, and it is therefore sometimes included in collections of the Apocrypha.[citation needed]

The Syriac Orthodox tradition includes:[citation needed]

Psalms 151C155
The Apocalypse of Baruch
The Letter of Baruch
The Ethiopian Biblical canon includes:[citation needed]

Jubilees
Enoch
1C3 Meqabyan
and some other books.

The Anglican Church uses some of the Apocryphal books liturgically. Therefore, editions of the Bible intended for use in the Anglican Church include the Deuterocanonical books accepted by the Catholic Church, plus 1 Esdras, 2 Esdras and the Prayer of Manasseh, which were in the Vulgate appendix.[citation needed]

Pseudepigraphal books
Main article: Pseudepigrapha
The term Pseudepigrapha commonly describes numerous works of Jewish religious literature written from about 300 BCE to 300 CE. Not all of these works are actually pseudepigraphical. It also refers to books of the New Testament canon whose authorship is misrepresented. The "Old Testament" Pseudepigraphal works include the following:[71]

3 Maccabees
4 Maccabees
Assumption of Moses
Ethiopic Book of Enoch (1 Enoch)
Slavonic Book of Enoch (2 Enoch)
Hebrew Book of Enoch (3 Enoch) (also known as "The Revelation of Metatron" or "The Book of Rabbi Ishmael the High Priest")
Book of Jubilees
Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch (2 Baruch)
Letter of Aristeas (Letter to Philocrates regarding the translating of the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek)
Life of Adam and Eve
Martyrdom and Ascension of Isaiah
Psalms of Solomon
Sibylline Oracles
Greek Apocalypse of Baruch (3 Baruch)
Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs
Book of Enoch
Notable pseudepigraphal works include the Books of Enoch (such as 1 Enoch, 2 Enoch, surviving only in Old Slavonic, and 3 Enoch, surviving in Hebrew, c. 5th to 6th century CE). These are ancient Jewish religious works, traditionally ascribed to the prophet Enoch, the great-grandfather of the patriarch Noah. They are not part of the biblical canon used by Jews, apart from Beta Israel. Most Christian denominations and traditions may accept the Books of Enoch as having some historical or theological interest or significance. It has been observed that part of the Book of Enoch is quoted in the Epistle of Jude (part of the New Testament) but Christian denominations generally regard the Books of Enoch as non-canonical or non-inspired.[72] However, the Enoch books are treated as canonical by the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church and Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church.

The older sections (mainly in the Book of the Watchers) are estimated to date from about 300 BC, and the latest part (Book of Parables) probably was composed at the end of the 1st century BCE.[73]

Denominational views of Pseudepigrapha
There arose in some Protestant biblical scholarship an extended use of the term pseudepigrapha for works that appeared as though they ought to be part of the biblical canon, because of the authorship ascribed to them, but which stood outside both the biblical canons recognized by Protestants and Catholics. These works were also outside the particular set of books that Roman Catholics called deuterocanonical and to which Protestants had generally applied the term Apocryphal. Accordingly, the term pseudepigraphical, as now used often among both Protestants and Roman Catholics (allegedly for the clarity it brings to the discussion), may make it difficult to discuss questions of pseudepigraphical authorship of canonical books dispassionately with a lay audience. To confuse the matter even more, Eastern Orthodox Christians accept books as canonical that Roman Catholics and most Protestant denominations consider pseudepigraphical or at best of much less authority. There exist also churches that reject some of the books that Roman Catholics, Orthodox and Protestants accept. The same is true of some Jewish sects. Many works that are "apocryphal" are otherwise considered genuine.

Role of Old Testament in Christian theology
Further information: Sola scriptura and Christian theology
The Old Testament has always been central to the life of the Christian church. Bible scholar N.T. Wright says "Jesus himself was profoundly shaped by the scriptures."[74] He adds that the earliest Christians also searched those same Hebrew scriptures in their effort to understand the earthly life of Jesus. They regarded the "holy writings" of the Israelites as necessary and instructive for the Christian, as seen from Paul's words to Timothy (2 Timothy 3:15), and as pointing to the Messiah, and as having reached a climactic fulfillment in Jesus himself, generating the "new covenant" prophesied by Jeremiah.[75]

New Testament
Main article: Development of the New Testament canon
The New Testament is a collection of 27 books[76] of 4 different genres of Christian literature (Gospels, one account of the Acts of the Apostles, Epistles and an Apocalypse). Jesus is its central figure. The New Testament presupposes the inspiration of the Old Testament.[77](2 Timothy 3:16) Nearly all Christians recognize the New Testament as canonical scripture. These books can be grouped into:

The Gospels

Synoptic Gospels
Gospel According to Matthew
Gospel According to Mark
Gospel According to Luke
Gospel According to John
Narrative literature, account and history of the Apostolic age

Acts of the Apostles
Pauline Epistles

Epistle to the Romans
First Epistle to the Corinthians
Second Epistle to the Corinthians
Epistle to the Galatians
Epistle to the Ephesians
Epistle to the Philippians
Epistle to the Colossians
First Epistle to the Thessalonians
Second Epistle to the Thessalonians
Pastoral epistles

First Epistle to Timothy
Second Epistle to Timothy
Epistle to Titus
Epistle to Philemon
Epistle to the Hebrews
General epistles, also called catholic epistles

Epistle of James
First Epistle of Peter
Second Epistle of Peter
First Epistle of John
Second Epistle of John
Third Epistle of John
Epistle of Jude
Apocalyptic literature, also called Prophetical

Revelation, or the Apocalypse
The New Testament books are ordered differently in the Catholic/Orthodox/Protestant tradition, the Slavonic tradition, the Syriac tradition and the Ethiopian tradition.

Original language
See also: Language of the New Testament
The mainstream consensus is that the New Testament was written in a form of Koine Greek,[78][79] which was the common language of the Eastern Mediterranean[80][81][82][83] from the Conquests of Alexander the Great (335C323 BCE) until the evolution of Byzantine Greek (c. 600).

Historic editions

The Codex Gigas from the 13th century, held at the Swedish Royal Library in Stockholm
See also: Biblical manuscript and Textual criticism
The original autographs, that is, the original Greek writings and manuscripts written by the original authors of the New Testament, have not survived.[84] But historically copies exist of those original autographs, transmitted and preserved in a number of manuscript traditions. There have been some minor variations, additions or omissions, in some of the texts. When ancient scribes copied earlier books, they sometimes wrote notes on the margins of the page (marginal glosses) to correct their textespecially if a scribe accidentally omitted a word or lineand to comment about the text. When later scribes were copying the copy, they were sometimes uncertain if a note was intended to be included as part of the text. Over time, different regions evolved different versions, each with its own assemblage of omissions and additions.[85]

The three main textual traditions of the Greek New Testament are sometimes called the Alexandrian text-type (generally minimalist), the Byzantine text-type (generally maximalist), and the Western text-type (occasionally wild). Together they comprise most of the ancient manuscripts.

Development of the Christian canons
Main articles: Development of the Old Testament canon and Development of the New Testament canon
The Old Testament canon entered into Christian use in the Greek Septuagint translations and original books, and their differing lists of texts. In addition to the Septuagint, Christianity[vague] subsequently added various writings that would become the New Testament. Somewhat different lists of accepted works continued to develop in antiquity. In the 4th century a series of synods produced a list of texts equal to the 39, 46(51),54, or 57 book canon of the Old Testament and to the 27-book canon of the New Testament that would be subsequently used to today, most notably the Synod of Hippo in 393 CE. Also c. 400, Jerome produced a definitive Latin edition of the Bible (see Vulgate), the canon of which, at the insistence of the Pope, was in accord with the earlier Synods. With the benefit of hindsight it can be said that this process effectively set the New Testament canon, although there are examples of other canonical lists in use after this time.

The Protestant Old Testament of today has a 39-book canonthe number of books (though not the content) varies from the Jewish Tanakh only because of a different method of divisionwhile the Roman Catholic Church recognizes 46 books (51 books with some books combined into 46 books) as the canonical Old Testament. The Eastern Orthodox Churches recognise 3 Maccabees, 1 Esdras, Prayer of Manasseh and Psalm 151 in addition to the Catholic canon. Some include 2 Esdras. The Anglican Church also recognises a longer canon.[citation needed] The term "Hebrew Scriptures" is often used as being synonymous with the Protestant Old Testament, since the surviving scriptures in Hebrew include only those books, while Catholics and Orthodox include additional texts that have not survived in Hebrew. Both Catholics and Protestants (as well as Greek Orthodox) have the same 27-book New Testament Canon.[86]

The New Testament writers assumed the inspiration of the Old Testament, probably earliest stated in 2 Timothy 3:16, "All scripture is given by inspiration of God".[10]

Ethiopian Orthodox canon
Main article: Ethiopian Biblical canon
The Canon of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church is wider than the canons used by most other Christian churches. There are 81 books in the Ethiopian Orthodox Bible.[87] The Ethiopian Old Testament Canon includes the books found in the Septuagint accepted by other Orthodox Christians, in addition to Enoch and Jubilees which are ancient Jewish books that only survived in Ge'ez but are quoted in the New Testament,[citation needed] also Greek Ezra First and the Apocalypse of Ezra, 3 books of Meqabyan, and Psalm 151 at the end of the Psalter. The three books of Meqabyan are not to be confused with the books of Maccabees. The order of the other books is somewhat different from other groups', as well. The Old Testament follows the Septuagint order for the Minor Prophets rather than the Jewish order.[citation needed]

Divine inspiration
Main articles: Biblical inspiration, Biblical literalism, Biblical infallibility, and Biblical inerrancy
The Second Epistle to Timothy says that "all scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness". (2 Timothy 3:16)[88] Various related but distinguisahle views on divine inspiration include:

the view of the Bible as the inspired word of God: the belief that God, through the Holy Spirit, intervened and influenced the words, message, and collation of the Bible[89]
the view that the Bible is also infallible, and incapable of error in matters of faith and practice, but not necessarily in historic or scientific matters
the view that the Bible represents the inerrant word of God, without error in any aspect, spoken by God and written down in its perfect form by humans
Within these broad beliefs many schools of hermeneutics operate. "Bible scholars claim that discussions about the Bible must be put into its context within church history and then into the context of contemporary culture."[75] Fundamentalist Christians are associated[by whom?] with the doctrine of biblical literalism, where the Bible is not only inerrant, but the meaning of the text is clear to the average reader.[90]

Jewish antiquity attests to belief in sacred texts,[91][92] and a similar belief emerges in the earliest of Christian writings. Various texts of the Bible mention divine agency in relation to its writings.[93] In their book A General Introduction to the Bible, Norman Geisler and William Nix write: "The process of inspiration is a mystery of the providence of God, but the result of this process is a verbal, plenary, inerrant, and authoritative record."[94] Most evangelical biblical scholars[95][96][97] associate inspiration with only the original text; for example some American Protestants adhere to the 1978 Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy which asserted that inspiration applied only to the autographic text of Scripture.[98] Among adherents of Biblical literalism, a minority, such as followers of the King-James-Only Movement, extend the claim of inerrancy only to a particular translation.[99]

Versions and translations
Further information: Bible translations and List of Bible translations by language

A Bible handwritten in Latin, on display in Malmesbury Abbey, Wiltshire, England. This Bible was transcribed in Belgium in 1407 for reading aloud in a monastery.

Title page from the first Welsh translation of the Bible, 1588. William Morgan (1545-1604)
The original texts of the Tanakh were mainly in Hebrew, with some portions in Aramaic. In addition to the authoritative Masoretic Text, Jews still refer to the Septuagint, the translation of the Hebrew Bible into Greek, and the Targum Onkelos, an Aramaic version of the Bible. There are several different ancient versions of the Tanakh in Hebrew, mostly differing by spelling, and the traditional Jewish version is based on the version known as Aleppo Codex. Even in this version there are words which are traditionally read differently from written, because the oral tradition is considered more fundamental than the written one, and presumably mistakes had been made in copying the text over the generations.[citation needed]

The primary biblical text for early Christians was the Septuagint. In addition, they translated the Hebrew Bible into several other languages. Translations were made into Syriac, Coptic, Ethiopic, and Latin, among other languages. The Latin translations were historically the most important for the Church in the West, while the Greek-speaking East continued to use the Septuagint translations of the Old Testament and had no need to translate the New Testament.

The earliest Latin translation was the Old Latin text, or Vetus Latina, which, from internal evidence, seems to have been made by several authors over a period of time. It was based on the Septuagint, and thus included books not in the Hebrew Bible.

Pope Damasus I assembled the first list of books of the Bible at the Council of Rome in 382 CE. He commissioned Saint Jerome to produce a reliable and consistent text by translating the original Greek and Hebrew texts into Latin. This translation became known as the Latin Vulgate Bible, in the fourth century CE. And in 1546, at the Council of Trent, Jerome's Vulgate translation was declared by the Roman Catholic Church to be the only authentic and official Bible in the Latin Church.

Since the Protestant Reformation, Bible translations for many languages have been made. The Bible continues to be translated to new languages, largely by Christian organisations such as Wycliffe Bible Translators, New Tribes Mission and Bible societies.

Bible translations, worldwide (as of November 2014)[100]
Number	Statistic
7,000	Approximate number of languages spoken in the world today
2,195	Number of translations into new languages currently in progress
1,329	Number of languages with a translation of the New Testament
531	Number of languages with a translation of the Bible (Protestant Canon)
Views
John Riches, professor of Divinity and Biblical Criticism at the University of Glasgow, provides the following view of the diverse historical influences of the Bible:

It has inspired some of the great monuments of human thought, literature, and art; it has equally fuelled some of the worst excesses of human savagery, self-interest, and narrow-mindedness. It has inspired men and women to acts of great service and courage, to fight for liberation and human development; and it has provided the ideological fuel for societies which have enslaved their fellow human beings and reduced them to abject poverty. ... It has, perhaps above all, provided a source of religious and moral norms which have enabled communities to hold together, to care for, and to protect one another; yet precisely this strong sense of belonging has in turn fuelled ethnic, racial, and international tension and conflict.[101]

Other religions
Main article: Islamic view of the Christian Bible
In Islam, the Bible is held to reflect true unfolding revelation from God; but revelation which had been corrupted or distorted (in Arabic: tahrif); which necessitated the giving of the Qur'an to the Islamic prophet, Muhammad, to correct this deviation.

Members of other religions may also seek inspiration from the Bible. For example, Rastafaris view the Bible as essential to their religion[102] and Unitarian Universalists view it as "one of many important religious texts".[103]

Biblical studies
Main articles: Biblical studies and Biblical criticism
Biblical criticism refers to the investigation of the Bible as a text, and addresses questions such as authorship, dates of composition, and authorial intention. It is not the same as criticism of the Bible, which is an assertion against the Bible being a source of information or ethical guidance, or observations that the Bible may have translation errors.[104]

Higher criticism
Main articles: Higher criticism and Lower criticism
In the 17th century Thomas Hobbes collected the current evidence to conclude outright that Moses could not have written the bulk of the Torah. Shortly afterwards the philosopher Baruch Spinoza published a unified critical analysis, arguing that the problematic passages were not isolated cases that could be explained away one by one, but pervasive throughout the five books, concluding that it was "clearer than the sun at noon that the Pentateuch was not written by Moses . . ."[105][106]

Archaeological and historical research
Main articles: Biblical archaeology school and The Bible and history
Biblical archaeology is the archaeology that relates to and sheds light upon the Hebrew Scriptures and the Christian Greek Scriptures (or "New Testament"). It is used to help determine the lifestyle and practices of people living in biblical times. There are a wide range of interpretations in the field of biblical archaeology. One broad division includes biblical maximalism which generally takes the view that most of the Old Testament or Hebrew Bible is based on history although it is presented through the religious viewpoint of its time. It is considered the opposite of biblical minimalism which considers the Bible a purely post-exilic (5th century BCE and later) composition. Even among those scholars who adhere to biblical minimalism, the Bible is a historical document containing first-hand information on the Hellenistic and Roman eras, and there is universal scholarly consensus that the events of the 6th century BCE Babylonian captivity have a basis in history.

The historicity of the biblical account of the history of ancient Israel and Judah of the 10th to 7th centuries BCE is disputed in scholarship. The biblical account of the 8th to 7th centuries BCE is widely, but not universally, accepted as historical, while the verdict on the earliest period of the United Monarchy (10th century BCE) and the historicity of David is unclear. Archaeological evidence providing information on this period, such as the Tel Dan Stele, can potentially be decisive. The biblical account of events of the Exodus from Egypt in the Torah, and the migration to the Promised Land and the period of Judges are not considered historical in scholarship.[107][108]

Bibles Gallery
Bibles

Old Bible from a Greek monastery
 

Imperial Bible, or Vienna Coronation Gospels from Wien (Austria), c 1500.
 

The Kennicott Bible, 1476
 

A Baroque Bible
 

The bible used by Abraham Lincoln for his oath of office during his first inauguration in 1861
 

A miniature Bible
 

19th century Victorian Bible
 

Shelves of the Bizzell Bible Collection at Bizzell Memorial Library
Illustrations
Most old Bibles were illuminated, they were manuscripts in which the text is supplemented by the addition of decoration, such as decorated initials, borders (marginalia) and miniature illustrations. Up to the twelfth century, most manuscripts were produced in monasteries in order to add to the library or after receiving a commission from a wealthy patron. Larger monasteries often contained separate areas for the monks who specialized in the production of manuscripts called a scriptorium, where separate little rooms were assigned to book copying; they were situated in such a way that each scribe had to himself a window open to the cloister walk.[109] By the fourteenth century, the cloisters of monks writing in the scriptorium started to employ laybrothers from the urban scriptoria, especially in Paris, Rome and the Netherlands.[110] Demand for manuscripts grew to an extent that the Monastic libraries were unable to meet with the demand, and began employing secular scribes and illuminators.[111] These individuals often lived close to the monastery and, in certain instances, dressed as monks whenever they entered the monastery, but were allowed to leave at the end of the day.[112]

The manuscript was sent to the rubricator, who added (in red or other colors) the titles, headlines, the initials of chapters and sections, the notes and so on; and then C if the book was to be illustrated C it was sent to the illuminator.[109] In the case of manuscripts that were sold commercially, the writing would undoubtedly have been discussed initially between the patron and the scribe (or the scribes agent,) but by the time that the written gathering were sent off to the illuminator there was no longer any scope for innovation.[113]

Bible illustrations

Bible from 1150, from Scriptorium de Chartres, Christ with angels
 

Blanche of Castile and Louis IX of France Bible, 13th century
 

Bible moralise : Christ the architect of the Universe.
 

Maciejowski Bible, Leaf 37, the 3rd image, Abner (in the center in green) sends Michal back to David.
 

Jephthah's daughter laments - Maciejowski Bible (France, ca. 1250)
 

Colored version of the Whore of Babylon illustration from Martin Luther's 1534 translation of the Bible.
 

An Armenian Bible, illuminated by Malnazar, Armenian) illuminator.
 

Fleeing Sodom and Gomorrah, Foster Bible
See also
	Bible portal
	Judaism portal
icon	Christianity portal
	Islam portal
Biblical software
Code of Hammurabi
List of major biblical figures
Religious text
Scriptorium
Theodicy and the Bible
Endnotes
Jump up ^ Miller & Huber, Stephen & Robert (2003). The Bible: the making and impact on the Bible a history. England: Lion Hudson. p. 21. ISBN 0-7459-5176-7.
Jump up ^ Riches, John (2000). The Bible: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 7C8. ISBN 978-0-19-285343-1.
Jump up ^ "Best selling book of non-fiction". Guinness World Records. Retrieved 9 December 2015.
Jump up ^ Ryken, Leland. "How We Got the Best-Selling Book of All Time". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 9 December 2015.
Jump up ^ "The battle of the books". The Economist. 22 December 2007.
Jump up ^ Ash, Russell (2001). Top 10 of Everything 2002. Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 0-7894-8043-3.
^ Jump up to: a b Harper, Douglas. "bible". Online Etymology Dictionary.
Jump up ^ "The Catholic Encyclopedia". Newadvent.org. 1907. Retrieved 2010-04-23.
Jump up ^ Biblion, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, at Perseus.
^ Jump up to: a b Stagg, Frank. New Testament Theology. Nashville: Broadman, 1962. ISBN 0-8054-1613-7.
Jump up ^ "From Hebrew Bible to Christian Bible" by Mark Hamilton on PBS's site From Jesus to Christ: The First Christians.
Jump up ^ Dictionary.com etymology of the word "Bible".
Jump up ^ Bruce, Frederick (1988). The Canon of Scripture. Downers Grove, Illinois, U.S.: IVP Academic. p. 214. ISBN 083081258X.
Jump up ^ Bible Hub C The NT generally uses 1124 (graph?) for the Hebrew Scriptures (the OT) C but see also 2 Tim 3:16 and 2 Pet 3:16. 1124 (graph?) was used for the Hebrew Scriptures as early as Aristeas (about 130 bc; so MM)
Jump up ^ "Where did the chapter and verse numbers of the Bible originate?". CA.
Jump up ^ Davies, Philip R. (2008). Memories of ancient Israel. Westminster John Knox Press. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-664-23288-7.[dead link]
Jump up ^ Riches, John (2000). The Bible: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 83. ISBN 978-0-19-285343-1.
Jump up ^ Riches, John (2000). The Bible: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-19-285343-1.
Jump up ^ Lim, Timothy H. (2005). The Dead Sea Scrolls: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 41.
Jump up ^ Riches, John (2000). The Bible: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 37. ISBN 978-0-19-285343-1.
^ Jump up to: a b Riches, John (2000). The Bible: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 23, 37. ISBN 978-0-19-285343-1.
Jump up ^ A 7th-century fragment containing the Song of the Sea (Exodus 13:19C16:1) is one of the few surviving texts from the "silent era" of Hebrew biblical texts between the Dead Sea Scrolls and the Aleppo Codex. See "Rare scroll fragment to be unveiled," Jerusalem Post, May 21, 2007.
Jump up ^ [1] The Restored New Testament: A New Translation with Commentary, Including the Gnostic Gospels Thomas, Mary, and Judas by Willis Barnstone C W. W. Norton & Company C page 647
Jump up ^ [2] The Torah: Portion by Portion By Seymour Rossel C Torah Aura Productions, 2007, p. 355
Jump up ^ Mordecai Kaplan 1934 Judaism as a Civilization MacMillan Press
Jump up ^ Elliot N. Dorff 1979 Conservative Judaism: Our Ancestors to Our Descendants. United Synagogue. p. 98C99 (114C115 in 1978 edition) Archived September 6, 2015, at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Milton Steinberg 1947 Basic Judaism Harcourt Brace, p. 27C28 ISBN 0-15-610698-1 Archived September 6, 2015, at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Gilbert Rosenthal 1973 Four paths to One God Bloch Publishing pp. 116C128, 180C192, 238C242
Jump up ^ 1Kings.18:24;1Kings.18:37C39 9
Jump up ^ George Savran "I and II Kings" in The Literary Guide to the Bible edited by Robert Alter and Frank Kermode. "Each king is judged either good or bad in black-and-white terms, according to whether or not he "did right" or "did evil" in the sight of the Lord. This evaluation is not reflective of the well-being of the nation, of the king's success or failure in war, or of the moral climate of the times, but rather the state of cultic worship during his reign. Those kings who shun idolatry and enact religious reforms are singled out for praise, and those who encourage pagan practices are denounced." 146
Jump up ^ Yehezkel Kaufmann "Israel In Canaan" in Great Ages and Ideas of the Jewish People edited by Leo Schwartz, The Modern Library. "The fight against Baal was initiated by the prophets" 54
Jump up ^ Yehezkel Kaufmann "The Age of Prophecy" in Great Ages and Ideas of the Jewish People edited by Leo Schwartz, The Modern Library. "The immediate occasion of the rise of the new prophecy was the political and social ruin caused by the wars with Israel's northerly neighbor, Aram, which continued for more than a century. They raged intensely during the reign of Ahab, and did not end until the time of Jeroboam II (784C744). While the nation as a whole was impoverished, a few C apparently of the royal officialdom C grew wealthy as a result of the national calamity. Many of the people were compelled to sell their houses and lands, with the result that a sharp social cleavage arose: on the one hand a mass of propertyless indigents, on the other a small circle of the rich. A series of disasters struck the nation C drought, famine, plagues, death and captivity (Amos 4: 6C11), but the greatest disaster of all was the social disintegration due to the cleavage between the poor masses and the wealthy, dissolute upper class. The decay affected both Judah and Israel ... High minded men were appalled at this development. Was this the people whom YHWH had brought out of Egypt, to whom He had given the land and a law of justice and right? it seemed as if the land was about to be inherited by the rich, who would squander its substance in drunken revelry. it was this dissolution that brought the prophetic denunciations to white heat." 57C58
Jump up ^ Abraham Joshua Heschel 1955 The Prophets Harper and Row: "What manner of man is the prophet? A student of philosophy who runs from the discourses of the great metaphysicians to the orations of the prophets may feel as if he were going from the realm of the sublime to an area of trivialities. Instead of dealing with the timeless issues of being and becoming, of matter and form, of definitions and demonstrations, he is thrown into orations about widows and orphans, about the corruption of judges and affairs of the market place. Instead of showing us a way through the elegant mansions of the mind, the prophets take us to the slums. The world is a proud place, full of beauty, but the prophets are scandalized, and rave as if the whole world were a slum. They make much ado about paltry things, lavishing excessive language upon trifling subjects. What if somewhere in ancient Palestine poor people have not been treated properly by the rich? .... Indeed, the sorts of crimes and even the amount of delinquency that fill the prophets of Israel with dismay do not go beyond that which we regard as normal, as typical ingredients of social dynamics. To us a single act of injustice C cheating in business, exploitation of the poor C is slight; to the prophets, a disaster. To us an injustice is injurious to the welfare of the people; to the prophets it is a deathblow to existence; to us an episode; to them, a catastrophe, a threat to the world." 3C4
Jump up ^ Joel Rosenberg "I and II Samuel" in The Literary Guide to the Bible edited by Robert Alter and Frank Kermode. "Samuel is thus a work of national self-criticism. It recognizes that Israel would not have survived, either politically or culturally, without the steadying presence of a dynastic royal house. But it makes both that house and its subjects answerable to firm standards of prophetic justice  not those of cult prophets or professional ecstatics, but of morally upright prophetic leaders in the tradition of Moses, Joshua, Deborah, Gideon, and others ..." 141
Jump up ^ Neusner, Jacob, The Talmud Law, Theology, Narrative: A Sourcebook. University Press of America, 2005
Jump up ^ Coogan, Michael D. A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament: the Hebrew Bible in its Context. Oxford University Press. 2009; p. 5
Jump up ^ [3] The Babylonian Talmud, Vol. 7 of 9: Tract Baba Bathra (Last Gate) translated by Michael L. Rodkinson, first published 1918 C published 2008 by Forgotten Books, p. 53
Jump up ^ [4] Ketuvim ?????????? 30 July 2008
Jump up ^ Coogan, Michael. A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament: The Hebrew Bible in Its Context. Oxford University Press, 2009, p. 5
Jump up ^ Henshaw, T. The Writings: The Third Division of the Old Testament Canon. George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1963, pp. 16C17
Jump up ^ Lightfoot, Neil R. How We Got the Bible, 3rd edition, rev. and expanded. Baker Book House Company. 2003, pp. 154C155.
Jump up ^ Henshaw, T. The Writings: The Third Division of the Old Testament Canon. George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1963, p. 17
Jump up ^ Sir Godfrey Driver. "Introduction to the Old Testament of the New English Bible." Web: 30 November 2009
Jump up ^ Life after death: a history of the afterlife in the religions of the West (2004), Anchor Bible Reference Library, Alan F. Segal, p. 363
Jump up ^ Gilles Dorival, Marguerite Harl, and Olivier Munnich, La Bible grecque des Septante: Du juda?sme hellnistique au christianisme ancien (Paris: Cerfs, 1988), p.111
^ Jump up to: a b "[...] die griechische Bibelbersetzung, die einem innerjdischen Bedrfnis entsprang [...] [von den] Rabbinen zuerst gerhmt (..) Sp?ter jedoch, als manche ungenaue bertragung des hebr?ischen Textes in der Septuaginta und bersetzungsfehler die Grundlage fr hellenistische Irrlehren abgaben, lehte man die Septuaginta ab." Verband der Deutschen Juden (Hrsg.), neu hrsg. von Walter Homolka, Walter Jacob, Tovia Ben Chorin: Die Lehren des Judentums nach den Quellen; Mnchen, Knesebeck, 1999, Bd.3, S. 43ff
^ Jump up to: a b Karen H. Jobes and Moises Silva (2001). Invitation to the Septuagint. Paternoster Press. ISBN 1-84227-061-3.
Jump up ^ Joel Kalvesmaki, The Septuagint
Jump up ^ Rick Grant Jones, Various Religious Topics, "Books of the Septuagint," (Accessed 2006.9.5).
Jump up ^ "The translation, which shows at times a peculiar ignorance of Hebrew usage, was evidently made from a codex which differed widely in places from the text crystallized by the Masorah." "Bible Translations C The Septuagint". JewishEncyclopedia.com. Retrieved 10 February 2012.
Jump up ^ "Two things, however, rendered the Septuagint unwelcome in the long run to the Jews. Its divergence from the accepted text (afterward called the Masoretic) was too evident; and it therefore could not serve as a basis for theological discussion or for homiletic interpretation. This distrust was accentuated by the fact that it had been adopted as Sacred Scripture by the new faith [Christianity] [...] In course of time it came to be the canonical Greek Bible [...] It became part of the Bible of the Christian Church.""Bible Translations C The Septuagint". JewishEncyclopedia.com. Retrieved 10 February 2012.
Jump up ^ Mishnah Sotah (7:2C4 and 8:1), among many others, discusses the sacredness of Hebrew, as opposed to Aramaic or Greek. This is comparable to the authority claimed for the original Arabic Koran according to Islamic teaching. As a result of this teaching, translations of the Torah into Koine Greek by early Jewish Rabbis have survived as rare fragments only.
Jump up ^ Ernst Wrthwein, The Text of the Old Testament, trans. Errol F. Rhodes, Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. Eerdmans, 1995.
Jump up ^ "NETS: Electronic Edition". Ccat.sas.upenn.edu. 2011-02-11. Retrieved 2012-08-13.
^ Jump up to: a b This article incorporates text from the 1903 Encyclopaedia Biblica article "TEXT AND VERSIONS", a publication now in the public domain.
^ Jump up to: a b Jennifer M. Dines, The Septuagint, Michael A. Knibb, Ed., London: T&T Clark, 2004.
Jump up ^ Timothy McLay, The Use of the Septuagint in New Testament Research ISBN 0-8028-6091-5.  The current standard introduction on the NT & LXX.
Jump up ^ The canon of the original Old Greek LXX is disputed. This table reflects the canon of the Old Testament as used currently in Orthodoxy.
Jump up ^ ? (Basilein) is the genitive plural of ? (Basileia).
Jump up ^ That is, Things set aside from ?? ?.
Jump up ^ also called ? or ? in some sources.
Jump up ^ Not in Orthodox Canon, but originally included in the LXX. http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/nets/edition/
Jump up ^ Obdiou is genitive from "The vision of Obdias," which opens the book.
Jump up ^ Originally placed after 3 Maccabees and before Psalms, but placed in an appendix of the Orthodox Canon
Jump up ^ The Masoretic Text and the Dead Sea Scrolls C biblicalarchaeology.org. Retrieved 26 December 2012.
Jump up ^ "Dead Sea Scrolls" (PDF). Retrieved 2013-06-06.
Jump up ^ Council of Trent: Decretum de Canonicis Scripturis "Decree Concerning the Canonical Scriptures", from the Council's fourth session, of 4 April 1546: Canons and Decrees of the Council of Trent, The Fourth Session, Celebrated on the eighth day of the month of April, in the year 1546, English translation by James Waterworth (London 1848).
Jump up ^ The Council of Trent confirmed the identical list/canon of sacred scriptures already anciently approved by the Synod of Hippo (Synod of 393), Councils of Carthage (The Council of Carthage, 28 August 397), and Council of Florence (originally Council of Basel), Session 11, 4 February 1442 [Bull of union with the Copts] seventh paragraph down.
Jump up ^ "Paragraph 120". Catechism of the Catholic Church, Second Edition. Libreria Editrice Vaticana. 2012. Retrieved 6 August 2014.
Jump up ^ Canon of Trent: List of the Canonical Scriptures.
But if anyone receive not, as sacred and canonical, the said books entire with all their parts, as they have been used to be read in the Catholic Church, and as they are contained in the old Latin vulgate edition; and knowingly and deliberately contemn the traditions aforesaid; let him be anathema.
?Decretum de Canonicis Scripturis, Council of Trent, 8 April 1546
Jump up ^ Harris, Stephen L., Understanding the Bible. Palo Alto: Mayfield. 1985.
Jump up ^ The Book of Enoch C The Reluctant Messenger. Retrieved 14 June 2014.
Jump up ^ Fahlbusch E., Bromiley G.W. The Encyclopedia of Christianity: PCSh page 411, ISBN 0-8028-2416-1 (2004)
Jump up ^ Wright, N.T. The Last Word:, page 3 HarperCollins, 2005. ISBN 0-06-087261-6 / 9780060872618
^ Jump up to: a b Wright, N.T. The Last Word: Scripture and the Authority of GodGetting Beyond the Bible Wars. HarperCollins, 2005. ISBN 0-06-087261-6 / 9780060872618
Jump up ^ [5] What the Bible is All About Visual Edition by Henrietta C. Mears C Gospel Light Publications, Feb 5, 2007 C page 438-439
Jump up ^ [6] Inspiration and Inerrancy: A History and a Defense,Henry Preserved Smith C R. Clarke, 1893, p. 343
Jump up ^ Kurt Aland, Barbara Aland The text of the New Testament: an introduction to the critical 1995 p52 "The New Testament was written in Koine Greek, the Greek of daily conversation. The fact that from the first all the New Testament writings were written in Greek is conclusively demonstrated by their citations from the Old Testament ..."
Jump up ^ Archibald Macbride Hunter Introducing the New Testament 1972 p9 "How came the twenty-seven books of the New Testament to be gathered together and made authoritative Christian scripture? 1. All the New Testament books were originally written in Greek. On the face of it this may surprise us."
Jump up ^ Wenham The elements of New Testament Greek -p xxv Jeremy Duff, John William Wenham C 2005 "This is the language of the New Testament. By the time of Jesus the Romans had become the dominant military and political force, but the Greek language remained the 'common language' of the eastern Mediterranean and beyond, and Greek ..."
Jump up ^ Daniel B. Wallace Greek Grammar Beyond the Basics: An Exegetical Syntax of the New Testament 1997
Jump up ^ Henry St. John Thackeray Grammar of New Testament Greek ed. Friedrich Wilhelm Blass, 1911 "By far the most predominant element in the language of the New Testament is the Greek of common speech which was disseminated in the East by the Macedonian conquest, in the form which it had gradually assumed under the wider development ..."
Jump up ^ David E. Aune The Blackwell companion to the New Testament 2009 p61 CHAPTER 4 New Testament Greek Christophe Rico "In this short overview of the Greek language of the New Testament we will focus on those topics that are of greatest importance for the average reader, that is, those with important ..."
Jump up ^ [7] Manuscripts and the Text of the New Testament: An Introduction for English Readers by Keith Elliott, Ian Moir C Continuum International Publishing Group, Nov 20, 2000, p. 9
Jump up ^ [8] God-Trail of Evidence: The Quest for the Truth By Dwo C iUniverse, Jul 12, 2011, p. 152. ISBN 978-1-4502-9429-4 {sc}
Jump up ^ [9] Encyclopedia of Catholicism, Frank K. Flinn, Infobase Publishing, Jan 1, 2007, p. 103
Jump up ^ "The Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church". Ethiopianorthodox.org. Archived from the original on 5 November 2010. Retrieved 2010-11-19.
Jump up ^ Grudem, Wayne (1994). Systematic Theology. Leicester, England: Inter-Varsity Press. pp. 49C50.
Jump up ^ Rice, John R. - Our God-Breathed Book: The Bible - ISBN 0-87398-628-8, Sword of the Lord Publishers, 1969, pp 68-88.
Jump up ^ "Beyond Biblical Literalism and Inerrancy: Conservative Protestants and the Hermeneutic Interpretation of Scripture", John Bartkowski, Sociology of Religion, 57, 1996.
Jump up ^ Philo of Alexandria, De vita Moysis 3.23.
Jump up ^ Josephus, Contra Apion 1.8.
Jump up ^ "Basis for belief of Inspiration Biblegateway". Biblegateway.com. Retrieved 2010-04-23.
Jump up ^ Norman L. Geisler, William E. Nix. A General Introduction to the Bible. Moody Publishers, 1986, p.86. ISBN 0-8024-2916-5
Jump up ^ For example, see Leroy Zuck, Roy B. Zuck. Basic Bible Interpretation. Chariot Victor Pub, 1991, p.68. ISBN 0-89693-819-0
Jump up ^ Roy B. Zuck, Donald Campbell. Basic Bible Interpretation. Victor, 2002. ISBN 0-7814-3877-2
Jump up ^ Norman L. Geisler. Inerrancy. Zondervan, 1980, p.294. ISBN 0-310-39281-0
Jump up ^ International Council on Biblical Inerrancy (1978). "The Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy" (PDF). International Council on Biblical Inerrancy. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 April 2008.
Jump up ^ "Ruckman's belief in advanced revelations in the KJV". Retrieved 27 February 2014.
Jump up ^ [10] (Figures correct as of 2014.)
Jump up ^ Riches, John (2000). The Bible: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 134. ISBN 978-0-19-285343-1.
Jump up ^ Becoming Rasta: Origins of Rastafari Identity in Jamaica C Page 171, Charles Price C 2009
Jump up ^ Unitarian Universalism C Page 42, Zondervan Publishing, 2009
Jump up ^ "Expondo Os Erros Da Sociedade Bblica Internacional". Baptistlink.com. 2000. Retrieved 2012-01-13.
Jump up ^ [11] In the Beginning: Hijacking of the Religion of God, Volume 1 by Sami M. El-Soudani, Nabawia J. El-Soudani C Xlibris Corporation, January 1, 2009, p. 65
Jump up ^ [12] Ten More Amazing Discoveries By George Potter, Cedar Fort, October 1, 2005, p. 121
Jump up ^ Finkelstein, Israel; Neil Silberman. The Bible Unearthed.
Jump up ^ Dever, William. Who Were the Early Israelites and Where Did They Come from?.
^ Jump up to: a b Putnam A.M., Geo. Haven. Books and Their Makers During The Middle Ages. Vol. 1. New York: Hillary House, 1962. Print.
Jump up ^ De Hamel, 45
Jump up ^ De Hamel, 57
Jump up ^ De Hamel, 65
Jump up ^ De Hamel, Christopher. Medieval Craftsmen: Scribes and Illuminations. Buffalo: University of Toronto, 1992. p. 60.
References and further reading
Find more about
Bible
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Search Wiktionary	Definitions from Wiktionary
Search Commons	Media from Commons
Search Wikinews	News from Wikinews
Search Wikiquote	Quotations from Wikiquote
Search Wikisource	Texts from Wikisource
Search Wikibooks	Textbooks from Wikibooks
Search Wikivoyage	Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Search Wikiversity	Learning resources from Wikiversity
	Wikiversity has learning materials about Biblical Studies (NT)
Anderson, Bernhard W. Understanding the Old Testament. ISBN 0-13-948399-3.
Asimov, Isaac. Asimov's Guide to the Bible. New York, NY: Avenel Books, 1981. ISBN 0-517-34582-X.
Berlin, Adele, Marc Zvi Brettler and Michael Fishbane. The Jewish Study Bible. Oxford University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-19-529751-2.
Bible, Authorized Version. The New Cambridge Paragraph Bible, with the Apocrypha, King James Version, ed. by David Norton. Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 2005. N.B.: This is a critically reconstructed text of the Authorized "King James" Bible with its entire contents (including all of its marginalia, fore-matter, the Apocrypha, etc.), as close to the original translators' intentions and wording as possible at the time of this edition, with spelling modernized according to current Commonwealth usage. ISBN 978-0-521-84386-7
Brown, Raymond E., Joseph A. Fitzmyer, and Roland E. Murphy, eds. (1990). The New Jerome Biblical Commentary. New Jersey: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-614934-0.
Finkelstein, Israel; Silberman, Neil Asher (2001). "The Bible Unearthed: Archaeology's New Vision of Ancient Israel and the Origin of Its Sacred Texts". New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-7432-2338-1.
Finkelstein, Israel; Silberman, Neil Asher (August 2002). "Review: "The Bible Unearthed": A Rejoinder". Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research 327: 63C73. JSTOR 1357859.
Herzog, Ze'ev (29 October 1999). "Deconstructing the walls of Jericho". Ha'aretz. Archived from the original on 21 December 2008.
Dever, William G. (MarchCApril 2007). "Losing Faith: Who Did and Who Didn't, How Scholarship Affects Scholars" (PDF). Biblical Archaeology Review 33 (2): 54.
Dever, William G. Who Were the Early Israelites and Where Did They Come from? Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 2003. ISBN 0-8028-0975-8.
Ehrman, Bart D. Misquoting Jesus: The Story Behind Who Changed the Bible and Why New York, NY: HarperSanFrancisco, 2005. ISBN 0-06-073817-0.
Geisler, Norman (editor). Inerrancy. Sponsored by the International Council on Biblical Inerrancy. Zondervan Publishing House, 1980, ISBN 0-310-39281-0.
Head, Tom. The Absolute Beginner's Guide to the Bible. Indianapolis, IN: Que Publishing, 2005. ISBN 0-7897-3419-2
Hoffman, Joel M. In the Beginning: A Short History of the Hebrew Language. New York University Press, 2004. ISBN 0-8147-3690-4
Hotchkiss, Gregory K. The Middle Way: Reflections on Scripture and Tradition, in series, Reformed Episcopal Pamphlets, no. 3. Media, Penn.: Reformed Episcopal Publication Society, 1985. 27 p. N.B.: Place of publication also given as Philadelphia, Penn.; the approach to the issue is from an evangelical Anglican (Reformed Episcopal Church) orientation. Without ISBN
Lienhard, Joseph T. The Bible, The Church, and Authority. Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 1995.
Lindsell, Harold. The Battle for the Bible. Zondervan Publishing House, 1978. ISBN 0-310-27681-0
Masalha, Nur, The Bible and Zionism: Invented Traditions, Archaeology and Post-Colonialism in Palestine-Israel. London, Zed Books, 2007.
McDonald, Lee M. and Sanders, James A., eds. The Canon Debate. Hendrickson Publishers (1 January 2002). 662p. ISBN 1-56563-517-5 ISBN 978-1565635173
Miller, John W. The Origins of the Bible: Rethinking Canon History Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, 1994. ISBN 0-8091-3522-1.
Riches, John. The Bible: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-19-285343-0
Roper, J.C., Bp., et al.. The Bible. Toronto: Musson Book Co., 1924. In series, "The Layman's Library of Practical Religion, Church of England in Canada", vol. 4. N.B.: Series statement given here in the more extended form of it on the book's front cover.
Siku. The Manga Bible: From Genesis to Revelation. Galilee Trade (15 January 2008). 224p. ISBN 0-385-52431-5 ISBN 978-0385524315
Taylor, Hawley O. "Mathematics and Prophecy." Modern Science and Christian Faith. Wheaton: Van Kampen, 1948, pp. 175C83.
Wycliffe Bible Encyclopedia, s.vv. "Book of Ezekiel," p. 580 and "prophecy," p. 1410. Chicago: Moody Bible Press, 1986.
[show] v t e
Books of the Bible
[show] v t e
Christianity
[show] v t e
Jews and Judaism
[show] v t e
Bible lists
[hide] v t e
Religious texts
Books	
Aqdas (Baha'i) Avesta (Zoroastrian) Bible (Christian) Book of Shadows (Wiccan) Dianetics (Scientologist) Geniocracy (Raelian) Guru Granth Sahib (Sikh) Liber AL vel Legis (Thelemite) Ofudesaki (Tenrikyo) Quran (Muslim) The Satanic Bible (Satanist) Tao Te Ching (Taoist) Torah (Jewish) Tripitaka (Buddhist) Vedas (Hindu)
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 174429434 GND: 4006406-2 SUDOC: 028198654 BNF: cb12008248x (data) NDL: 00570431
Categories: BibleJudeo-Christian topicsJewish literatureChristian literature
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikisource
Languages
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
????
?nglisc
??
???????
Aragons
?????
Arm?neashti
Asturianu
Ava?e'?
Aymar aru
Az?rbaycanca
Bamanankan
?????
Ban-lam-g
?

 (?)?
Bikol Central
Bislama

Boarisch
???????
Bosanski
Brezhoneg

Catal
?
Cebuano
?e?tina
Chi-Chewa
ChiShona
ChiTumbuka
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deitsch
Deutsch
??????????
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
?
Espa?ol
Esperanto
Estreme?u
Euskara
E?egbe
?????
F?royskt
Fran?ais
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gidhlig
Galego
MZ
G?k?y?
???????
?????? ?????? / G?ychi Konknni
Z/Hak-ka-ng?

???
Hausa
Hawai?i
???????
??????
Hiri Motu
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Igbo
Ilokano
????????????? ???????
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue

IsiXhosa
IsiZulu
slenska
Italiano
?????
Basa Jawa
Kalaallisut
?????
???????
Kasz?bsczi
??
Kernowek
Kinyarwanda
Kirundi
Kiswahili

Kongo
Kreyl ayisyen
Kurd?
Kwanyama

 
Ladino
???
Latina
Latvie?u
L?tzebuergesch
Lietuvi?
Limburgs
Lingla
Luganda
Lumbaart
Magyar

Malagasy
??????
Malti
?????
?????????
????
Bahasa Melayu
Mng-d??ng-ng??
Mirands

??????????
Nhuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Na Vosa Vakaviti
Nederlands
Nedersaksies
??????
????? ????
Z
Napulitano

Norsk bokm?l
Norsk nynorsk
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
Oromoo
Oshiwambo
O?zbekcha/?
??????
P?lzisch
Pangasinan
??????
Papiamentu
Patois
 
Piemontis
Tok Pisin
Plattdtsch
Polski
Portugus
Reo tahiti
Ripoarisch
Roman?
Rumantsch
Runa Simi


 
Smegiella
Gagana Samoa
S?ng?
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Sesotho
Sesotho sa Leboa
Setswana
Shqip
Sicilianu
?????
Simple English
????
SiSwati
Sloven?ina
Sloven??ina
?l?nski
Soomaaliga
?????? ???????
Sranantongo
 / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / 
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
?????
Taqbaylit
/tatar?a
??????
Tetun
???
????
??
Lea faka-Tonga
Tsetshestahese
Tshivenda
Trk?e
Trkmen?e
Twi
?
????
???????? / Uyghurche
Vneto
Veps?n kel
Ti?ng Vi?t
Volapk
V?ro
Walon

West-Vlams
Winaray
Wolof

Xitsonga
??????
Yorb
Z
Zazaki
Zeuws
?emait??ka

??????
Edit links
This page was last modified on 14 July 2016, at 12:30.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
 This is a featured article. Click here for more information. Page semi-protected Listen to this article
Jesus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Jesus christ)
This article is about Jesus of Nazareth. For other uses, see Jesus (disambiguation).
Jesus
Cefal Pantocrator retouched.jpg
Christ Pantocrator mosaic in Byzantine style, from the Cefal Cathedral, Sicily, c. 1131
Born	c. 4 BC[a]
Herodian Tetrarchy, Roman Empire[5]
Died	c. AD 30C33[b]
(aged c. 33)
Jerusalem, Judea, Roman Empire
Cause of death	Crucifixion[c]
Home town	Nazareth, Galilee[11]
Parent(s)	
Mary Joseph[d]
Part of a series on
Jesus
Jesus in Christianity[show]
Jesus in Islam[show]
Background[show]
Jesus in history[show]
Perspectives on Jesus[show]
Jesus in culture[show]
icon Christianity portal
 Islam portal
Wikipedia book Book:Jesus
v t e
Jesus (/?d?i?z?s/ jee-zuss Greek: ???, translit. Iesous; Hebrew: ?????, translit. Y??a?, lit. 'Yeshua; "He saves"'?;[12] c. 4 BC C c. AD 30), also referred to as Jesus of Nazareth or Jesus Christ,[e] was a Jewish preacher[13] who became the central figure of Christianity.[14][15] Christians believe him to be the Son of God and the awaited Jewish Messiah (Christ, the Anointed One) of the Old Testament.[14][15]

Virtually all modern scholars of antiquity agree that Jesus existed historically,[f] and they consider the Synoptic Gospels (Matthew, Mark, and Luke) to be the best sources for investigating the historical Jesus.[22][23] Most scholars agree that Jesus was a Galilean Jewish rabbi[24][not in citation given] who preached his message orally,[25] was baptized by John the Baptist, and was crucified by the order of the Roman Prefect Pontius Pilate.[26] In the current mainstream view, Jesus was an apocalyptic preacher and the founder of a renewal movement within Judaism, although some prominent scholars argue that he was not apocalyptic.[27][28] Jesus debated with Jewish authorities on the subject of God, performed some healings, taught in parables and gathered followers.[26] After Jesus' death, his followers believed he was resurrected, and the community they formed eventually became the Christian Church.[29] His birth is celebrated annually on December 25 (or various dates in January for some eastern churches) as a holiday known as Christmas, his crucifixion is honored on Good Friday, and his resurrection is celebrated on Easter. The widely used calendar era "AD", from the Latin "Anno Domini" ("in the year of our Lord"), and the alternative "CE", are based on the birth of Jesus.[30][31][32]

Christians believe that Jesus has a "unique significance" in the world.[33] Christian doctrines include the beliefs that Jesus was conceived by the Holy Spirit, was born of a virgin named Mary, performed miracles, founded the Church, died by crucifixion as a sacrifice to achieve atonement, rose from the dead, and ascended into Heaven, whence he will return.[34] Most Christians believe Jesus enables humans to be reconciled to God. The Nicene Creed asserts that Jesus will judge the dead[35] either before or after their bodily resurrection,[36][37][38] an event tied to the Second Coming of Jesus in Christian eschatology;[39] though some believe Jesus's role as savior has more existential or societal concerns than the afterlife,[40] and a few notable theologians have suggested that Jesus will bring about a universal reconciliation.[41] The great majority of Christians worship Jesus as the incarnation of God the Son, the second of three persons of a Divine Trinity. A minority of Christian denominations reject Trinitarianism, wholly or partly, as non-scriptural.

In Islam, Jesus (commonly transliterated as Isa) is considered one of God's important prophets and the Messiah.[42][43] Muslims believe Jesus was a bringer of scripture and was born of a virgin but was not the Son of God. Muslims also believe that Jesus himself never claimed divinity,[44] and predict that at the Last Judgment, Jesus will deny having ever made such a claim (Quran 5:116).[45] To most Muslims, Jesus was not crucified but was physically raised into Heaven by God. Judaism rejects the belief that Jesus was the awaited Messiah, arguing that his death on the cross signifies that he was rejected by God and that his resurrection is a Christian legend.[46]

Contents  [hide] 
1	Etymology
2	Canonical gospel accounts
2.1	Canonical gospels
2.2	Genealogy and nativity
2.3	Early life, family, and profession
2.4	Baptism and temptation
2.5	Public ministry
2.5.1	Disciples and followers
2.5.2	Teaching, preaching, and miracles
2.5.3	Proclamation as Christ and Transfiguration
2.6	Passion Week
2.6.1	Activities in Jerusalem
2.6.2	Last Supper
2.6.3	Agony in the Garden, betrayal, and arrest
2.6.4	Trials by the Sanhedrin, Herod, and Pilate
2.6.5	Crucifixion and entombment
2.7	Resurrection and Ascension
3	Historical views
3.1	Judea and Galilee in the 1st century
3.2	Sources
3.3	Chronology
3.4	Historicity of events
3.4.1	Family
3.4.2	Baptism and John the Baptist
3.4.3	Ministry in Galilee
3.4.4	Role
3.4.5	Crucifixion in Jerusalem
3.4.6	Post-crucifixion
3.5	Portraits of Jesus
3.6	Language, ethnicity, and appearance
3.7	Christ myth theory
4	Perspectives
4.1	Christian
4.2	Jewish
4.3	Islamic
4.4	Bah'
4.5	Other
5	Depictions
6	Associated relics
7	See also
8	Notes
8.1	Explanatory
8.2	Citations
9	Bibliography
10	External links
Etymology
Further information: Jesus (name), Holy Name of Jesus, Name of God in Christianity, Yeshua (name), Yasu (disambiguation), and Isa (name)

Hebrew, Greek and Latin transcriptions of the name Jesus
A typical Jew in Jesus' time had only one name, sometimes supplemented with the father's name or the individual's hometown.[27] Thus, in the New Testament, Jesus is commonly referred to as "Jesus of Nazareth"[g] (e.g., Mark 10:47). Jesus' neighbors in Nazareth refer to him as "the carpenter, the son of Mary and brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon" (Mark 6:3), "the carpenter's son" (Matthew 13:55), or "Joseph's son" (Luke 4:22). In John, the disciple Philip refers to him as "Jesus son of Joseph from Nazareth" (John 1:45).

The name Jesus is derived from the Latin Iesus, a transliteration of the Greek ??? (Iesous).[47] The Greek form is a rendering of the Hebrew ????? (Yeshua), a variant of the earlier name ?????? (Yehoshua), in English "Joshua".[48][49][50] The name Yeshua appears to have been in use in Judea at the time of the birth of Jesus.[51] The first century works of historian Flavius Josephus, who wrote in Koine Greek, the same language as that of the New Testament,[52] refer to at least twenty different people with the name Jesus (i.e. ???).[53] The etymology of Jesus' name in the context of the New Testament is generally given as "Yahweh is salvation".[54]

Since early Christianity, Christians have commonly referred to Jesus as "Jesus Christ".[55] The word Christ is derived from the Greek ?? (Christos),[47][56] which is a translation of the Hebrew ???? (Meshiakh), meaning the "anointed" and usually transliterated into English as "Messiah".[57][58] Christians designate Jesus as Christ because they believe he is the awaited Messiah prophesied in the Hebrew Bible and Old Testament. In postbiblical usage, Christ became viewed as a nameone part of "Jesus Christ"but originally it was a title.[59][60] The term "Christian" (meaning "one who owes allegiance to the person Christ" or simply "follower of Christ") has been in use since the first century.[61][62]

Canonical gospel accounts
Main article: Life of Jesus in the New Testament
See also: New Testament places associated with Jesus and Names and titles of Jesus in the New Testament
Events in the
Life of Jesus
according to the Gospels
Life of Jesus
Early life[show]
Ministry[show]
Passion[show]
Resurrection[show]
In rest of the NT[show]
Portals: P christianity.svg Christianity Bible.malmesbury.arp.jpg Bible

Wikipedia book Book:Life of Jesus
v t e
The four canonical gospels (Mark, Matthew, Luke, and John) are the only substantial sources for the life and message of Jesus.[63] Other parts of the New Testament, such as the Pauline epistles, which were probably written decades before the gospels, also include references to key episodes in his life, such as the Last Supper in 1 Corinthians 11:23C26.[64][65][66] Acts of the Apostles (10:37C38 and 19:4) refers to the early ministry of Jesus and its anticipation by John the Baptist.[67][68] Acts 1:1C11 says more about the Ascension of Jesus (also mentioned in 1 Timothy 3:16) than the canonical gospels do.[69]

Some early Christian and Gnostic groups had separate descriptions of the life and teachings of Jesus that are not included in the New Testament. These include the Gospel of Thomas, the Gospel of Peter, and the Apocryphon of James, among many other apocryphal writings. Most scholars consider these much later and less reliable accounts than the canonical gospels.[70][71]

Canonical gospels
See also: Gospel, Gospel harmony, Historical reliability of the Gospels, and Internal consistency of the New Testament
A four-page papyrus manuscript, which is torn in many places
A 3rd-century Greek papyrus of the Gospel of Luke
The canonical gospels are four accounts, each written by a different author. According to the Marcan priority, the first to be written was the Gospel of Mark (written AD 60C75), followed by the Gospel of Matthew (AD 65C85), the Gospel of Luke (AD 65C95), and the Gospel of John (AD 75C100).[72] They often differ in content and in the ordering of events.[73][74]

Traditionally, the writing of the gospels has been attributed to four evangelists with close ties to Jesus:[75] Mark was written by John Mark, an associate of Peter;[76] Matthew was written by one of Jesus' disciples;[75] Luke was written by a companion of Paul, someone mentioned in a few epistles;[75] and John was written by another of Jesus' disciples,[75] in fact part of an inner group of disciples, along with Peter and John's brother James.[77]

Three of them, Matthew, Mark, and Luke, are known as the Synoptic Gospels, from the Greek ? (syn "together") and ?? (opsis "view").[78][79][80] They are similar in content, narrative arrangement, language and paragraph structure.[78][79] Scholars generally agree that it is impossible to find any direct literary relationship between the Synoptic Gospels and the Gospel of John.[81] While the flow of some events (such as Jesus' baptism, transfiguration, crucifixion and interactions with the apostles) are shared among the Synoptic Gospels, incidents such as the transfiguration do not appear in John, which also differs on other matters, such as the Cleansing of the Temple.[82]

Jesus in the Synoptic Gospels	Jesus in the Gospel of John
Begins with Jesus' baptism or birth to a virgin.[75]	Begins with creation, with no birth story.[75]
Baptized by John the Baptist.[75]	Baptism presupposed but not mentioned.[75]
Teaches in parables and aphorisms.[75]	Teaches in long, involved discourses.[75]
Teaches primarily about the Kingdom of God, little about himself.[75]	Teaches primarily and extensively about himself.[75]
Speaks up for the poor and oppressed.[75]	Says little to nothing about the poor or oppressed.[75]
Exorcises demons.[83]	Does not exorcise demons.[83]
Public ministry lasts one year.[75]	Public ministry lasts three years.[75]
Cleansing the Temple occurs late.[75]	Cleansing the Temple is early.[75]
Jesus ushers in a new covenant with a last supper.[75]	Jesus washes the disciples' feet.[75]
Most scholars agree, following what is known as the "Marcan hypothesis", that the authors of Matthew and Luke used Mark as a source when writing their gospels. Matthew and Luke also share some content not found in Mark. To explain this, many scholars believe that in addition to Mark, another source (commonly called the "Q source") was used by the two authors.[84]

According to a broad scholarly consensus, the Synoptic Gospels, and not John, are the primary sources of historical information about Jesus.[85][86][27] However, not everything contained in the New Testament gospels is considered to be historically reliable.[87] Elements whose historical authenticity is disputed include the Nativity, the Massacre of the Innocents, the Resurrection, the Ascension, Jesus' miracles, and the Sanhedrin trial, among others.[88][89][90][91] Historians, according to Gerd Theissen, are right to be skeptical of miracles such as walking on water, but exorcisms and healings are well-documented in many cultures and should be considered possible.[92] Views on the gospels range from their being inerrant descriptions of the life of Jesus[93] to their providing little historical information about his life beyond the basics.[94][95]

The Synoptics emphasize different aspects of Jesus. In Mark, Jesus is the Son of God whose mighty works demonstrate the presence of God's Kingdom.[76] He is a tireless wonder worker, the servant of both God and man.[96] This short gospel records few of Jesus' words or teachings.[76] The Gospel of Matthew emphasizes that Jesus is the fulfillment of God's will as revealed in the Old Testament, and he is the Lord of the Church.[97] He is the kingly Messiah, referred to repeatedly as "king" and "Son of David."[96] A noteworthy feature of this gospel are the five discourses, collections of teachings on particular themes, including the Sermon on the Mount.[97] Luke presents Jesus as the divine-human savior who shows compassion to the needy.[98] He is the friend of sinners and outcasts, come to seek and save the lost.[96] This gospel includes Jesus' most beloved parables, such as the Good Samaritan and the Prodigal Son.[98]

The Synoptics and John agree on the main outline of Jesus' life. John the Baptist precedes Jesus, their ministries overlap, and John witnesses to Jesus' identity. Jesus teaches and performs miracles, at least partly in Galilee. He then visits Jerusalem, where the leaders have him crucified, and he is buried. After his tomb is found empty on Sunday, the risen Jesus presents himself to his followers.[99]

The prologue to the Gospel of John identifies Jesus as an incarnation of the divine Word (Logos).[100] As the Word, Jesus was eternally present with God, active in all creation, and the source of humanity's moral and spiritual nature.[100] With this prologue, the evangelist establishes that Jesus is not only greater than any past human prophet but greater than any prophet could be. He not only speaks God's Word; he is God's Word.[101] In the Gospel of John, Jesus reveals his divine role publicly. Here he is the Bread of Life, the Light of the World, the True Vine and more.[96]

In general, the authors of the New Testament showed little interest in an absolute chronology of Jesus or in synchronizing the episodes of his life with the secular history of the age.[102] As stated in John 21:25, the gospels do not claim to provide an exhaustive list of the events in the life of Jesus.[103] The accounts were primarily written as theological documents in the context of early Christianity, with timelines as a secondary consideration.[104] One manifestation of the gospels as theological documents rather than historical chronicles is that they devote about one third of their text to just seven days, namely the last week of the life of Jesus in Jerusalem, referred to as the Passion.[105] Although the gospels do not provide enough details to satisfy the demands of modern historians regarding exact dates, it is possible to draw from them a general picture of the life story of Jesus.[87][102][104]

Genealogy and nativity
Main articles: Genealogy of Jesus and Nativity of Jesus
A Nativity scene; men and animals surround Mary and newborn Jesus, who are covered in light
Adoration of the Shepherds by Gerard van Honthorst, 1622.
Matthew and Luke each offer a genealogy of Jesus. Matthew traces Jesus' ancestry to Abraham through David. Luke traces Jesus' ancestry through Adam to God.[106] The lists are identical between Abraham and David, but differ radically from that point. Traditional Christian scholars (starting with the historian Eusebius) have put forward various theories that seek to explain why the lineages are so different,[107] such as that Matthew's account follows the lineage of Joseph, while Luke's follows the lineage of Mary. Modern biblical scholars such as Marcus J. Borg and John Dominic Crossan see both genealogies as inventions, conforming to Jewish literary convention.[108]

Matthew and Luke each describe Jesus' nativity (or birth), especially that Jesus was born of a virgin in Bethlehem in fulfillment of prophecy. Luke's account emphasizes events before the birth of Jesus and centers on Mary, while Matthew's mostly covers those after the birth and centers on Joseph.[109][110][111] Both accounts state that Jesus was born to Joseph and Mary, his betrothed, in Bethlehem, and both support the doctrine of the virgin birth, according to which Jesus was miraculously conceived by the Holy Spirit in Mary's womb when she was still a virgin.[112][113][114] The virgin birth has been a consistent tenet of orthodox Christian belief, although a number of liberal theologians have questioned it in the last 150 years.[115] Matthew repeatedly cites the Old Testament to support the belief that Jesus is the Jews' promised Messiah.[116]

In Matthew, Joseph is troubled because Mary, his betrothed, is pregnant (Matthew 1:19C20), but in the first of Joseph's three dreams an angel assures him not to be afraid to take Mary as his wife, because her child was conceived by the Holy Spirit.[117] In Matthew 2:1C12, wise men or Magi from the East bring gifts to the young Jesus as the King of the Jews. Herod hears of Jesus' birth and, wanting him killed, orders the murders of male infants in Bethlehem. But an angel warns Joseph in his second dream, and the family flees to Egyptlater to return and settle in Nazareth.[117][118][119]

In Luke 1:31C38 Mary learns from the angel Gabriel that she will conceive and bear a child called Jesus through the action of the Holy Spirit.[110][112] When Mary is due to give birth, she and Joseph travel from Nazareth to Joseph's ancestral home in Bethlehem to register in the census ordered by Caesar Augustus. While there Mary gives birth to Jesus, and as they have found no room in the inn, she places the newborn in a manger (Luke 2:1C7). An angel announces the birth to some shepherds, who go to Bethlehem to see Jesus, and subsequently spread the news abroad (Luke 2:8C20). After the presentation of Jesus at the Temple, Joseph, Mary and Jesus return to Nazareth.[110][112]

Early life, family, and profession
Main article: Child Jesus
See also: Return of the family of Jesus to Nazareth and Unknown years of Jesus

12-year-old Jesus found in the temple depicted by James Tissot
Jesus' childhood home is identified in the gospels of Luke and Matthew as the town of Nazareth in Galilee where he lived with his family. Although Joseph appears in descriptions of Jesus' childhood, no mention is made of him thereafter.[120] His other family membershis mother, Mary, his brothers James, Joses (or Joseph), Judas and Simon and his unnamed sistersare mentioned in the gospels and other sources.[121][122]

According to Stephen L. Harris, Gospel of Mark says that Jesus comes into conflict with his neighbors and family.[123] Jesus' mother and brothers come to get him (3:31C35) because people are saying that he is crazy (3:21). Jesus responds that his followers are his true family. In John, Mary follows Jesus to his crucifixion, and he expresses concern over her well-being (19:25C27).

Jesus is called a ? (tekton) in Mark 6:3, traditionally understood as carpenter but could cover makers of objects in various materials, including builders.[124][125] The gospels indicate that Jesus could read, paraphrase, and debate scripture, but this does not necessarily mean that he received formal scribal training.[126] When Jesus is presented in the temple per Jewish Law, a man named Simeon says to Mary and Joseph that Jesus "shall stand as a sign of contradiction, while a sword will pierce your own soul. Then the secret thoughts of many will come to light."(Luke 2:28-35) When Jesus goes missing, they find him in the temple sitting among the teachers, listening to them and asking questions, and the people are amazed at his understanding and answers; Mary scolds Jesus for going missing, to which Jesus replies that he must "be in his father's house."(Luke 2:41-52)

Baptism and temptation
Main articles: Baptism of Jesus and Temptation of Christ

Trevisani's depiction of the baptism of Jesus, with the Holy Spirit descending from Heaven as a dove
The Synoptic accounts of Jesus' baptism are all preceded by information about John the Baptist.[127][128][129] They show John preaching penance and repentance for the remission of sins and encouraging the giving of alms to the poor (Luke 3:11) as he baptizes people in the area of the River Jordan around Perea and foretells (Luke 3:16) the arrival of someone "more powerful" than he.[130][131] Later, Jesus identifies John as "the Elijah who was to come" (Matthew 11:14, Mark 9:13-14), the prophet who was expected to arrive before the "great and terrible day of the Lord" (Malachi 4:5). Likewise, Luke says that John had the spirit and power of Elijah (Luke 1:17).

In Mark, John baptizes Jesus, and as he comes out of the water he see the Holy Spirit descending to him like a dove and he hears a voice from heaven declaring him to be God's son (Mark 1:9C11). This is one of two events described in the gospels where a voice from Heaven calls Jesus "Son", the other being the Transfiguration.[132][133] The spirit then drives him into the wilderness where he is tempted by Satan (Mark 1:12C13). Jesus then begins his ministry after John's arrest (Mark 1:14). Jesus' baptism in Matthew is similar. Here, before Jesus' baptism, John protests, saying, "I need to be baptized by you" (Matthew 3:14). Jesus instructs him to carry on with the baptism "to fulfill all righteousness" (Matthew 3:15). Matthew also details the three temptations that Satan offers Jesus in the wilderness (Matthew 4:3C11). In Luke, the Holy Spirit descends as a dove after everyone has been baptized and Jesus is praying (Luke 3:21-22). John implicitly recognizes Jesus from prison after sending his followers to ask about him (Luke 7:18C23). Jesus' baptism and temptation serve as preparation for his public ministry.[134]

The Gospel of John leaves out Jesus' baptism and temptation.[135] Here, John the Baptist testifies that he saw the Spirit descend on Jesus (John 1:32).[131][136] John publicly proclaims Jesus as the sacrificial Lamb of God, and some of John's followers become disciples of Jesus.[86] In this Gospel, John denies that he is Elijah (John 1:21). Before John is imprisoned, Jesus leads his followers to baptize disciples as well (John 3:22-24), and they baptize more people than John (John 4:1).

Public ministry
Main article: Ministry of Jesus
Jesus sits atop a mount, preaching to a crowd
A 19th-century painting depicting the Sermon on the Mount, by Carl Bloch
The Synoptics depict two distinct geographical settings in Jesus' ministry. The first takes place north of Judea in Galilee, where Jesus conducts a successful ministry; and the second shows Jesus rejected and killed when he travels to Jerusalem. Notably, Jesus forbids those who recognize his identity to speak of it, including people he heals and demons he exorcises (see Messianic Secret).[137]

John depicts Jesus' ministry as largely taking place in and around Jerusalem rather than in Galilee. In this Gospel, Jesus' divine identity is publicly proclaimed and immediately recognized.[101]

Scholars divide the ministry of Jesus into several stages. The Galilean ministry begins when Jesus returns to Galilee from the Judaean Desert after rebuffing the temptation of Satan. Jesus preaches around Galilee, and in Matthew 4:18C20, his first disciples, who will eventually form the core of the early Church, encounter him and begin to travel with him.[129][138] This period includes the Sermon on the Mount, one of Jesus' major discourses,[138][139] as well as the calming of the storm, the feeding of the 5,000, walking on water and a number of other miracles and parables.[140] It ends with the Confession of Peter and the Transfiguration.[141][142]

As Jesus travels towards Jerusalem, in the Perean ministry, he returns to the area where he was baptized, about a third of the way down from the Sea of Galilee along the Jordan (John 10:40C42).[143][144] The final ministry in Jerusalem begins with Jesus' triumphal entry into the city on Palm Sunday.[145] In the Synoptic Gospels, during that week Jesus drives the money changers from the Temple and Judas bargains to betray him. This period culminates in the Last Supper and the Farewell Discourse.[127][145][146]

Disciples and followers

Jesus talking to his 12 disciples, as depicted by James Tissot
Near the beginning of his ministry, Jesus appoints twelve apostles. In Matthew and Mark, despite Jesus only briefly requesting that they join him, Jesus' first four apostles, who were fishermen, are described as immediately consenting, and abandoning their nets and boats to do so (Matthew 4:18C22, Mark 1:16C20). In John, Jesus' first two apostles were disciples of John the Baptist. The Baptist sees Jesus and calls him the Lamb of God; the two hear this and follow Jesus.[147][148] In addition to the Twelve Apostles, the opening of the passage of the Sermon on the Plain identifies a much larger group of people as disciples (Luke 6:17). Also, in Luke 10:1C16 Jesus sends seventy or seventy-two of his followers in pairs to prepare towns for his prospective visit. They are instructed to accept hospitality, heal the sick and spread the word that the Kingdom of God is coming.[149]

In Mark, the disciples are notably obtuse. They fail to understand Jesus' miracles (Mark 4:35C41, 6:52), his parables (Mark 4:13), or what "rising from the dead" would mean (Mark 9:9C10). When Jesus is later arrested, they desert him (see below).[137]

Teaching, preaching, and miracles
Main articles: Sermon on the Mount, Parables of Jesus, and Miracles of Jesus
See also: Sermon on the Plain, Five Discourses of Matthew, Farewell Discourse, and Olivet Discourse

Christ and the Rich Young Ruler by Heinrich Hofmann, 1889
In the Synoptics, Jesus teaches extensively, often in parables, about the Kingdom of God (or, in Matthew, the Kingdom of Heaven). The Kingdom is described as both imminent (Mark 1:15) and already present in the ministry of Jesus (Luke 17:21). Jesus promises inclusion in the Kingdom for those who accept his message (Mark 10:13C27). Jesus talks of the "Son of Man," an apocalyptic figure who would come to gather the chosen.[27]

Jesus calls people to repent their sins and to devote themselves completely to God.[27] Jesus tells his followers to adhere to Jewish law, although he is perceived by some to have broken the law himself, for example regarding the Sabbath.[27] When asked what the greatest commandment is, Jesus replies: "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind ... And a second is like it: You shall love your neighbor as yourself" (Matthew 22:37C39). Other ethical teachings of Jesus include loving one's enemies, refraining from hatred and lust, and turning the other cheek (Matthew 5:21C44).[150] In the Gospel of John, when an adulteress is about to be stoned to death in accordance with Moses' Law, the Pharisees ask Jesus what he will say in this situation, to which Jesus replied "Let anyone among you who has no sin be the first to throw a stone at her", causing the accusers to go away, and Jesus says to the woman that he does not condemn her for no one has, and tells her to not sin again (John 8:1-11).

John's Gospel presents the teachings of Jesus not merely as his own preaching, but as divine revelation. John the Baptist, for example, states in John 3:34: "He whom God has sent speaks the words of God, for he gives the Spirit without measure." In John 7:16 Jesus says, "My teaching is not mine but his who sent me." He asserts the same thing in John 14:10: "Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words that I say to you I do not speak on my own; but the Father who dwells in me does his works."[151][152]

Jesus, his head surrounded by a halo, puts his hands on a leper, thereby healing him.
Jesus cleansing a leper C medieval mosaic from the Monreale Cathedral
In the gospels, the approximately thirty parables form about one third of Jesus' recorded teachings.[151][153] The parables appear within longer sermons and at other places in the narrative.[154] They often contain symbolism, and usually relate the physical world to the spiritual.[155][156] Common themes in these tales include the kindness and generosity of God and the perils of transgression.[157] Some of his parables, such as the Prodigal Son (Luke 15:11C32), are relatively simple, while others, such as the Growing Seed (Mark 4:26C29), are sophisticated, profound and abstruse.[158] When asked by his disciples about why he speaks in parables to the people, Jesus replies that the chosen disciples have been given to "know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven", unlike the rest of their people, "For the one who has will be given more and he will have in abundance. But the one who does not have will be deprived even more.", going on to say that the majority of their generation have grown "dull hearts" and thus are unable to understand (Matthew 13:10-17).

In the gospel accounts, Jesus devotes a large portion of his ministry performing miracles, especially healings.[159] The miracles can be classified into two main categories: healing miracles and nature miracles.[160] The healing miracles include cures for physical ailments, exorcisms, and resurrections of the dead.[161] The nature miracles show Jesus' power over nature, and include turning water into wine, walking on water, and calming a storm, among others. Jesus states that his miracles are from a divine source. When Jesus' opponents suddenly accuse him of performing exorcisms by the power of Beelzebul, the prince of demons, Jesus counters that he performs them by the "Spirit of God" (Matthew 12:28) or "finger of God", arguing that all logic suggests that Satan would not let his demons assist the Children of God because it would divide Satan's house and bring his kingdom to desolation; furthermore, he asks his opponents that if he exorcises by Beel'zebub, "by whom do your sons cast them out?"(Luke 11:20).[162][163] In Matthew 12:31-32, he goes on to say that while all manner of sin, "even insults against God" or "insults against the son of man", shall be forgiven, whoever insults goodness (or "The Holy Spirit") shall never be forgiven; he/she carries the guilt of his/her sin forever.

In John, Jesus' miracles are described as "signs", performed to prove his mission and divinity.[164][165] However, in the Synoptics, when asked by some teachers of the Law and some Pharisees to give miraculous signs to prove his authority, Jesus refuses,[164] saying that no sign shall come to corrupt and evil people except the sign of the prophet Jonah. Also, in the Synoptic Gospels, the crowds regularly respond to Jesus' miracles with awe and press on him to heal their sick. In John's Gospel, Jesus is presented as unpressured by the crowds, who often respond to his miracles with trust and faith.[166] One characteristic shared among all miracles of Jesus in the gospel accounts is that he performed them freely and never requested or accepted any form of payment.[167] The gospel episodes that include descriptions of the miracles of Jesus also often include teachings, and the miracles themselves involve an element of teaching.[168][169] Many of the miracles teach the importance of faith. In the cleansing of ten lepers and the raising of Jairus' daughter, for instance, the beneficiaries are told that their healing was due to their faith.[170][171]

Proclamation as Christ and Transfiguration
Main articles: Confession of Peter and Transfiguration of Jesus

The Transfiguration of Jesus, depicted by Carl Bloch
At about the middle of each of the three Synoptic Gospels, two related episodes mark a turning point in the narrative: the Confession of Peter and the Transfiguration of Jesus.[142][172] These events mark the beginnings of the gradual disclosure of the identity of Jesus to his disciples and his prediction of his own suffering and death.[132][133][142] These two events are omitted in the Gospel of John.[99]

In his Confession, Peter tells Jesus, "You are the Messiah, the Son of the living God."[173][174][175] Jesus affirms that Peter's confession is divinely revealed truth.[176][177]

In the Transfiguration (Matthew 17:1C9, Mark 9:2C8, and Luke 9:28C36),[132][133][142] Jesus takes Peter and two other apostles up an unnamed mountain, where "he was transfigured before them, and his face shone like the sun, and his clothes became dazzling white."[178] A bright cloud appears around them, and a voice from the cloud says, "This is my Son, the Beloved; with him I am well pleased; listen to him" (Matthew 17:1C9).[132] In 2 Peter 1:16-18, Peter himself affirms that he witnessed Jesus' Transfiguration, stating that the apostolic tradition is based on eyewitness testimony.[179]

Passion Week
Main article: Passion Week
The description of the last week of the life of Jesus (often called Passion Week) occupies about one third of the narrative in the canonical gospels,[105] starting with Jesus' triumphal entry into Jerusalem and ending with his Crucifixion.[127][145]

Activities in Jerusalem
Main articles: Triumphal entry into Jerusalem, Cleansing of the Temple, and Bargain of Judas
Jesus, riding a donkey colt, rides towards Jerusalem. A large crowd greets him outside the walls.
A painting of Jesus' final entry into Jerusalem, by Jean-Lon Gr?me, 1897
In the Synoptics, the last week in Jerusalem is the conclusion of the journey through Perea and Judea that Jesus began in Galilee.[145] Jesus rides a young donkey into Jerusalem, reflecting an oracle from the Book of Zechariah in which the Jews' humble king enters Jerusalem this way (Zechariah 9:9).[76] People along the way lay cloaks and small branches of trees (known as palm fronds) in front of him and sing part of Psalm 118:25C26.[180][181][182]

Jesus next expels the money changers from the Temple, accusing them of turning it into a den of thieves through their commercial activities. Jesus then prophesies about the coming destruction, including false prophets, wars, earthquakes, celestial disorders, persecution of the faithful, the appearance of an "abomination of desolation," and unendurable tribulations (Mark 13:1C23). The mysterious "Son of Man," he says, will dispatch angels to gather the faithful from all parts of the earth (Mark 13:24C27). According to Stephen L. Harris, Jesus warns that these wonders will occur in the lifetimes of the hearers (Mark 13:28C32).[137] In John, the Cleansing of the Temple occurs at the beginning of Jesus' ministry instead of the end John 2:13C16.[101]

Also in the Synoptics, Jesus comes into conflict with the Jewish elders, such as when they question his authority and when he criticizes them and calls them hypocrites.[180][182] Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve apostles, secretly strikes a bargain with the Jewish elder, agreeing to betray Jesus to them for 30 silver coins.[183][184]

The Gospel of John recounts of two other feasts in which Jesus taught in Jerusalem before the Passion Week (John 7:1C10:42).[123] He returns near Jerusalem, in Bethany, when he raises Lazarus from the dead, which increases the tension between him and the authorities.[145] The authorities then conspire to kill him (John 11).[123] Raising Lazarus is Jesus' most potent sign yet.[101] In Bethany, Mary of Bethany anoints Jesus' feet, foreshadowing his entombment.[185] Jesus then makes his Messianic entry into Jerusalem.[123] The cheering crowds greeting Jesus as he enters Jerusalem add to the animosity between him and the establishment.[145] In John, Jesus has already cleansed the Temple during an earlier Passover visit to Jerusalem. John next recounts Jesus' Last Supper with his disciples.[123]

Last Supper
Main article: Last Supper
See also: Jesus predicts his betrayal, Denial of Peter, and Last Supper in Christian art
A depiction of the Last Supper. Jesus sits in the center, his apostles gathered around on either side of him.
The Last Supper, depicted in this 16th-century painting by Juan de Juanes
The Last Supper is the final meal that Jesus shares with his 12 apostles in Jerusalem before his crucifixion. The Last Supper is mentioned in all four canonical gospels; Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians (11:23C26) also refers to it.[65][66][186] During the meal, Jesus predicts that one of his apostles will betray him.[187] Despite each Apostle's assertion that he would not betray him, Jesus reiterates that the betrayer would be one of those present. Matthew 26:23C25 and John 13:26C27 specifically identify Judas as the traitor.[65][66][187]

In the Synoptics, Jesus takes bread, breaks it, and gives it to the disciples, saying, "This is my body, which is given for you". He then has them all drink from a cup, saying, "This cup that is poured out for you is the new covenant in my blood" (Luke 22:19C20).[65][188] The Christian sacrament or ordinance of the Eucharist is based on these events.[189] Although the Gospel of John does not include a description of the bread-and-wine ritual during the Last Supper, most scholars agree that John 6:22C59 (the Bread of Life Discourse) has a eucharistic character and resonates with the institution narratives in the Synoptic Gospels and in the Pauline writings on the Last Supper.[190]

In all four gospels, Jesus predicts that Peter will deny knowledge of him three times before the rooster crows the next morning.[191][192] In Luke and John, the prediction is made during the Supper (Luke 22:34, John 22:34). In Matthew and Mark, the prediction is made after the Supper; Jesus also predicts that all his disciples will desert him (Matthew 26:31C34, Mark 14:27C30).[193] The Gospel of John provides the only account of Jesus washing his disciples' feet after the meal.[118] John also includes a long sermon by Jesus, preparing his disciples (now without Judas) for his departure. Chapters 14C17 of the Gospel of John are known as the Farewell Discourse and are a significant source of Christological content.[194][195]

Agony in the Garden, betrayal, and arrest
Main articles: Agony in the Garden, Kiss of Judas, and Arrest of Jesus
Judas kisses Jesus, and soldiers rush to seize the latter.
A 17th-century depiction of the kiss of Judas and arrest of Jesus, by Caravaggio
After the Last Supper, Jesus takes a walk to pray, and then Judas and the authorities come and arrest him.

In Mark, they go to the garden of Gethsemane,[193] where Jesus prays to be spared his coming ordeal. His disciples fall asleep while they should be watching (Mark 37C41). Then Judas comes with an armed mob, sent by the chief priests, scribes and elders.[137] He kisses Jesus to identify him to the crowd, which then arrests Jesus.[193] In an attempt to stop them, one of Jesus' disciples uses a sword to cut off the ear of a man in the crowd.[193] After Jesus' arrest, his disciples go into hiding, and Peter, when questioned, thrice denies knowing Jesus.[193] After the third denial, he hears the rooster crow and recalls the prediction as Jesus turns to look at him. Peter then weeps bitterly.[191]
In Matthew, Jesus criticizes the disciple's attack with the sword, enjoining his disciples not to resist his arrest. He says, "All who take the sword will perish by the sword" (Matthew 26:52).
In Luke, Jesus goes to the Mount of Olives to pray,[193] and Jesus miraculously heals the ear that a disciple severed (Luke 22:51).
In John, Jesus does not pray to be spared his crucifixion, as the gospel portrays him as scarcely touched by such human weakness.[196] The people who arrest him are soldiers and Jewish officers (John 18:3). Instead of being betrayed by a kiss, Jesus proclaims his identity, and when he does, the soldiers and officers fall to the ground (John 18:4C7). The gospel identifies Peter as the disciple who used the sword, and Jesus rebukes him for it (John 18:10C11).
Trials by the Sanhedrin, Herod, and Pilate
Main articles: Sanhedrin trial of Jesus, Pilate's Court, Jesus at Herod's Court, and Crown of Thorns
See also: Jesus, King of the Jews; What is truth?; and Ecce homo
After his arrest, Jesus is taken to the Sanhedrin, a Jewish judicial body.[197] The gospel accounts differ on the details of the trials.[198] In Matthew 26:57, Mark 14:53 and Luke 22:54, Jesus is taken to the house of the high priest, Caiaphas, where he is mocked and beaten that night. Early the next morning, the chief priests and scribes lead Jesus away into their council.[199][200][201] John 18:12C14 states that Jesus is first taken to Annas, Caiaphas' father-in-law, and then to the high priest.[199][200][201]

A depiction of Jesus' public trial
Ecce homo! Antonio Ciseri's 1871 depiction of Pontius Pilate presenting Jesus to the public
During the trials Jesus speaks very little, mounts no defense, and gives very infrequent and indirect answers to the priests' questions, prompting an officer to slap him. In Matthew 26:62 Jesus' unresponsiveness leads Caiaphas to ask him, "Have you no answer?"[199][200][201] In Mark 14:61 the high priest then asks Jesus, "Are you the Messiah, the Son of the Blessed One?" Jesus replies, "I am", and then predicts the coming of the Son of Man.[27] This provokes Caiaphas to tear his own robe in anger and to accuse Jesus of blasphemy. In Matthew and Luke, Jesus' answer is more ambiguous:[27][202] in Matthew 26:64 he responds, "You have said so", and in Luke 22:70 he says, "You say that I am".[203][204]

They take Jesus to Pilate's Court, but Pilate proves extremely reluctant to condemn Jesus; according to Robert W. Funk, it is the Jewish elders who are to blame for Jesus' crucifixion.[205] Augustine of Hippo says that Pilate was not free from blame, since he exercised his power to execute Jesus.[206] The Jewish elders ask the Roman governor Pontius Pilate to judge and condemn Jesus, accusing him of claiming to be the King of the Jews.[201] The use of the word "king" is central to the discussion between Jesus and Pilate. In John 18:36 Jesus states, "My kingdom is not from this world", but he does not unequivocally deny being the King of the Jews.[207][208] In Luke 23:7C15 Pilate realizes that Jesus is a Galilean, and thus comes under the jurisdiction of Herod Antipas.[209][210] Pilate sends Jesus to Herod to be tried,[211] but Jesus says almost nothing in response to Herod's questions. Herod and his soldiers mock Jesus, put an expensive robe on him to make him look like a king, and return him to Pilate,[209] who then calls together the Jewish elders and announces that he has "not found this man guilty".[211]

Observing a Passover custom of the time, Pilate allows one prisoner chosen by the crowd to be released. He gives the people a choice between Jesus and a murderer called Barabbas. Persuaded by the elders (Matthew 27:20), the mob chooses to release Barabbas and crucify Jesus.[212] Pilate writes a sign in Hebrew, Latin, and Greek that reads "Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews" (abbreviated as INRI in depictions) to be affixed to Jesus' cross (John 19:19C20),[213] then scourges Jesus and sends him to be crucified. The soldiers place a Crown of Thorns on Jesus' head and ridicule him as the King of the Jews. They beat and taunt him before taking him to Calvary,[214] also called Golgotha, for crucifixion.[199][201][215]

Crucifixion and entombment
Main articles: Crucifixion of Jesus and Burial of Jesus
See also: Sayings of Jesus on the cross and Crucifixion eclipse
A depiction of Jesus on the cross
Pietro Perugino's depiction of the Crucifixion as Stabat Mater, 1482
Jesus' crucifixion is described in all four canonical gospels. After the trials, Jesus is led to Calvary carrying his cross; the route traditionally thought to have been taken is known as the Via Dolorosa. The three Synoptic Gospels indicate that Simon of Cyrene assists him, having been compelled by the Romans to do so.[216][217] In Luke 23:27C28 Jesus tells the women in the multitude of people following him not to weep for him but for themselves and their children.[216] At Calvary, Jesus is offered a concoction usually offered as a painkiller. According to Matthew and Mark, he refuses it.[216][217]

The soldiers then crucify Jesus and cast lots for his clothes. Above Jesus' head on the cross is Pilate's inscription, "Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews"; soldiers and passersby mock him about it. Jesus is crucified between two convicted thieves, one of whom rebukes Jesus, while the other defends him.[216][218] The Roman soldiers break the two thieves' legs (a procedure designed to hasten death in a crucifixion), but they do not break those of Jesus, as he is already dead. In John 19:34, one soldier pierces Jesus' side with a lance, and blood and water flow out.[219] In Matthew 27:51C54, when Jesus dies, the heavy curtain at the Temple is torn and an earthquake breaks open tombs. Terrified by the events, a Roman centurion states that Jesus was the Son of God.[216][220]

On the same day, Joseph of Arimathea, with Pilate's permission and with Nicodemus' help, removes Jesus' body from the cross, wraps him in a clean cloth, and buries him in his new rock-hewn tomb.[216] In Matthew 27:62C66, on the following day the chief Jewish priests ask Pilate for the tomb to be secured, and with Pilate's permission the priests place seals on the large stone covering the entrance and post a guard.[216][221]

Resurrection and Ascension
Main articles: Resurrection of Jesus, Post-resurrection appearances of Jesus, and Ascension of Jesus
See also: Empty tomb, Great Commission, Second Coming, Resurrection of Jesus in Christian art, and Ascension of Jesus in Christian art

Jesus appearing to Mary Magdalene after his resurrection from the dead, depicted by Alexander Andreyevich Ivanov
In all four gospels, Mary Magdalene goes to Jesus' tomb on Sunday morning and is surprised to find it empty. Jesus, she learns, has risen from the dead. Despite Jesus' teaching, the disciples had not understood that Jesus would rise again.[222] After the discovery of the empty tomb, Jesus makes a series of appearances to the disciples.[69]

In Mark, Salome and a second Mary are with her (Mark 16:1). A young man in a white robe (an angel) tells them that Jesus will meet his disciples in Galilee, as he had told them (referring to Mark 14:28).[76] The gospel then ends abruptly.[137]
In Matthew, there's an earthquake when the women discover the tomb, and an angel of the Lord descends from heaven, terrifying the guards.[222] Jesus appears to the eleven remaining disciples in Galilee and commissions them to baptize all nations in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit.[118]
In Luke, Mary and the other women meet two angels, and the eleven disciples do not believe their story (Luke 25:1C12).[222] Jesus appears that same day to his disciples in Jerusalem (Luke 24:13C43). Although he appears and vanishes mysteriously, he also eats and lets them touch him to prove that he is not a spirit. He repeats his command to bring his teaching to all nations (Luke 24:51).[223]
In John, Mary is alone at first, but Peter and the beloved disciple come and see the tomb as well. Jesus then appears to Mary at the empty tomb.[222] He later appears to the disciples, breathes on them, and gives them the power to forgive and retain sins.[101] In a second visit, he proves to a doubting disciple ("Doubting Thomas") that he is flesh and blood.[101] The catch of 153 fish is a miracle by the Sea of Galilee, after which Jesus encourages Peter to serve his followers.[69][224]
Jesus' Ascension into Heaven is described in Luke 24:50-53, Acts 1:1C11 and mentioned in 1 Timothy 3:16. In Acts, forty days after the Resurrection, as the disciples look on, "he was lifted up, and a cloud took him out of their sight". 1 Peter 3:22 states that Jesus has "gone into heaven and is at the right hand of God".[69]

The Acts of the Apostles describes several appearances of Jesus in visions after his Ascension. Acts 7:55 describes a vision experienced by Stephen just before his death.[225] On the road to Damascus, the Apostle Paul is converted to Christianity after seeing a blinding light and hearing a voice saying, "I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting" (Acts 9:5).[226] In Acts 9:10C18, Jesus instructs Ananias of Damascus to heal Paul. It is the last conversation with Jesus reported in the Bible until the Book of Revelation,[226] in which a man named John receives a revelation from Jesus concerning the last days,[227] when Jesus is predicted to return victoriously (Revelation 19:11C21). In the closing lines of the New Testament, Jesus promises that he is coming soon (Revelation 22:12-21).

Historical views
Main articles: Historical Jesus and Quest for the historical Jesus
See also: Biblical criticism
Prior to the Enlightenment, the gospels were usually regarded as accurate historical accounts, but since then scholars have emerged who question the reliability of the gospels and draw a distinction between the Jesus described in the gospels and the Jesus of history.[228] Since the 18th century, three separate scholarly quests for the historical Jesus have taken place, each with distinct characteristics and based on different research criteria, which were often developed during the quest that applied them.[229][230] While there is widespread scholarly agreement on the existence of Jesus,[f] and a basic consensus on the general outline of his life,[231] the portraits of Jesus constructed in the quests have often differed from each other, and from the image portrayed in the gospel accounts.[232][233]

Approaches to the historical reconstruction of the life of Jesus have varied from the "maximalist" approaches of the 19th century, in which the gospel accounts were accepted as reliable evidence wherever it is possible, to the "minimalist" approaches of the early 20th century, where hardly anything about Jesus was accepted as historical.[234] In the 1950s, as the second quest for the historical Jesus gathered pace, the minimalist approaches faded away, and in the 21st century, minimalists such as Price are a very small minority.[235][236] Although a belief in the inerrancy of the gospels cannot be supported historically, many scholars since the 1980s have held that, beyond the few facts considered to be historically certain, certain other elements of Jesus' life are "historically probable".[235][237][238] Modern scholarly research on the historical Jesus thus focuses on identifying the most probable elements.[239][240]

Judea and Galilee in the 1st century
A map. See description
Judea, Galilee and neighboring areas at the time of Jesus
In AD 6, Judea, Idumea, and Samaria were transformed from a client kingdom of the Roman Empire into an imperial province. A Roman prefect, rather than a client king, ruled the land. The prefect ruled from Caesarea, leaving Jerusalem to be run by the high priest. As an exception, the prefect came to Jerusalem during religious festivals, when religious and patriotic enthusiasm sometimes inspired unrest or uprisings. Gentile lands surrounded the Jewish territories of Judea and Galilee, but Roman law and practice allowed Jews to remain separate legally and culturally. Galilee was evidently prosperous, and poverty was limited enough that it did not threaten the social order. Jewish religion was unusual in that Jews acknowledged only one God, they considered themselves chosen by him, and they wanted Gentiles to accept their God as the only God. Jews based their faith and religious practice on the Torah, five books said to have been given by God to Moses. The three prominent religious parties were Pharisees, Essenes, and Sadducees. Together these parties represented only a small fraction of the population. Most Jews looked forward to a time that God would deliver them from their pagan rulers, possibly through war against the Romans.[241]

Sources
See also: Josephus on Jesus and Tacitus on Jesus


A 1640 edition of the works of Josephus, a 1st-century Roman-Jewish historian who referred to Jesus[242]
Historians face a formidable challenge when they analyze the canonical Gospels.[243] The Gospels are not biographies in the modern sense, and the authors explain Jesus' theological significance and recount his public ministry while omitting many details of his life.[243] The reports of supernatural events associated with Jesus' death and resurrection make the challenge even more difficult.[243] Historians regard the gospels as compromised sources of information because the writers were trying to glorify Jesus.[87] Even so, the sources for Jesus' life are better than sources historians have for the life of Alexander the Great.[87] Scholars use a number of criteria, such as the criterion of independent attestation, the criterion of coherence, and the criterion of discontinuity to judge the historicity of events.[244] The historicity of an event also depends on the reliability of the source; indeed, the gospels are not independent nor consistent records of Jesus's life. Mark, which is most likely the earliest written gospel, has been considered for many decades the most historically accurate.[245] John, the latest written gospel, differs considerably from the Synoptic Gospels, and thus is generally considered less reliable, although more and more scholars now also recognize that it may contain a core of older material as historically valuable as the Synoptic tradition or even more so.[246]

The non-canonical Gospel of Thomas might be an independent witness to many of the Jesus' parables and aphorisms. For example, Thomas confirms that Jesus blessed the poor and that this saying circulated independently before being combined with similar sayings in the Q document.[247] Other select non-canonical Christian texts may also have historical value.[86]

Non-Christian sources used to establish the historical existence of Jesus include the works of first-century historians Josephus and Tacitus.[248][242][249] Josephus scholar Louis H. Feldman has stated that "few have doubted the genuineness" of Josephus' reference to Jesus in book 20 of the Antiquities of the Jews, and it is disputed only by a small number of scholars.[250][251] Tacitus referred to Christ and his execution by Pilate in book 15 of his work Annals. Scholars generally consider Tacitus's reference to the execution of Jesus to be both authentic and of historical value as an independent Roman source.[252]

Non-Christian sources are valuable in two ways. First, they show that even neutral or hostile parties never evince any doubt that Jesus actually existed. Second, they present a rough picture of Jesus that is compatible with that found in the Christian sources: that Jesus was a teacher, had a reputation as a miracle worker, had a brother James, and died a violent death.[11]

Archeology helps scholars better understand Jesus' social world.[253] Recent archeological work, for example, indicates that Capernaum, a city important in Jesus' ministry, was poor and small, without even a forum or an agora.[254][255] This archaeological discovery resonates well with the scholarly view that Jesus advocated reciprocal sharing among the destitute in that area of Galilee.[254]

Chronology
Main article: Chronology of Jesus
See also: Anno Domini
Most scholars agree that Jesus was a Galilean Jew, born around the beginning of the first century, who died between 30 and 33 AD in Judea.[6] The general scholarly consensus is that Jesus was a contemporary of John the Baptist and was crucified by the Roman governor Pontius Pilate, who held office from 26 to 36 AD.[26]

The gospels offer several clues concerning the year of Jesus' birth. Matthew 2:1 associates the birth of Jesus with the reign of Herod the Great, who died around 4 BC, and Luke 1:5 mentions that Herod was on the throne shortly before the birth of Jesus,[256][257] although this gospel also associates the birth with the Census of Quirinius which took place ten years later.[258][259] Luke 3:23 states that Jesus was "about thirty years old" at the start of his ministry, which according to Acts 10:37C38 was preceded by John's ministry, itself recorded in Luke 3:1C2 to have begun in the 15th year of Tiberius' reign (28 or 29 AD).[257][260] By collating the gospel accounts with historical data and using various other methods, most scholars arrive at a date of birth between 6 and 4 BC for Jesus,[260][261] but some propose estimates that lie in a wider range.[h]

The years of Jesus' ministry have been estimated using several different approaches.[262][263] One of these applies the reference in Luke 3:1C2, Acts 10:37C38 and the dates of Tiberius' reign, which are well known, to give a date of around 28C29 AD for the start of Jesus' ministry.[264] Another approach uses the statement about the temple in John 2:13C20, which asserts that the temple in Jerusalem was in its 46th year of construction at the start of Jesus' ministry, together with Josephus' statement that the temple's reconstruction was started by Herod in the 18th year of his reign, to estimate a date around 27C29 AD.[262][265] A further method uses the date of the death of John the Baptist and the marriage of Herod Antipas to Herodias, based on the writings of Josephus, and correlates it with Matthew 14:4 and Mark 6:18.[266][267] Given that most scholars date the marriage of Herod and Herodias as AD 28C35, this yields a date about 28C29 AD.[263]

A number of approaches have been used to estimate the year of the crucifixion of Jesus. Most scholars agree that he died between 30 and 33 AD.[6][268] The gospels state that the event occurred during the prefecture of Pilate, the Roman governor of Judea from 26 to 36 AD.[269][270][271] The date for the conversion of Paul (estimated to be 33C36 AD) acts as an upper bound for the date of Crucifixion. The dates for Paul's conversion and ministry can be determined by analyzing Paul's epistles and the Book of Acts.[272][273] Astronomers since Isaac Newton have tried to estimate the precise date of the Crucifixion by analyzing lunar motion and calculating historic dates of Passover, a festival based on the lunisolar Hebrew calendar. The most widely accepted dates derived from this method are April 7, 30 AD, and April 3, 33 AD (both Julian).[274]

Historicity of events
Main article: Historicity of Jesus
See also: Cultural and historical background of Jesus, History of the Jews in the Roman Empire, Higher criticism, Textual criticism, and Historical reliability of the Gospels
A white statue of a man
An apparently old document
Roman senator and historian Tacitus wrote of the crucifixion of Christ (Jesus) in the Annals, a history of the Roman Empire during the first century.
Historians have reached a limited consensus on the basics of Jesus' life.[74]

Family
See also: Brothers of Jesus
Jesus was Jewish and born to Mary and Joseph.[275] He grew up in Nazareth in Galilee.[276] Leading scholars such as Bart Ehrman, E. P. Sanders, and Gza Vermes generally consider Joseph to be Jesus' father.[277][278][275] Jesus also had brothers and sisters.[275] The natural assumption is these offspring resulted from Joseph and Mary having sex, contrary to Catholic tradition.[275] It is unusual that in Mark 6:3, Jesus' neighbors refer to Jesus as Mary's son, because sons were identified by their fathers.[279] This reference has led some scholars to suggest that Jesus was illegitimate and that Joseph is a fictional character.[280] Mary's identity as a historical figure, however, is certain.[281] Joseph may well have died by the time Jesus' career began, but several of the earliest sources report that Mary outlived Jesus.[275]

It is common for extraordinary charismatic leaders, such as Jesus, to come into conflict with their ordinary families.[282] In Mark, Jesus' family comes to get him, fearing that he is mad (Mark 3:20C34), and this account is likely historical because early Christians wouldn't have invented it.[205] John also reports that Jesus' brothers did not believe him (John 7:5).[205] After Jesus' death, many members of his family joined the Christian movement and enjoyed positions of respect within it.[282] His brother James served as a leader in the Jerusalem.[283] James may have had a change of heart after having a vision of the resurrected Jesus (1 Corinthians 15:7).[205]

Stories of Jesus' birth, along with other key events, have so many mythic elements that some scholars have suggested that Jesus himself was a myth.[284] Historians say that the doctrine of Jesus' virgin birth arose from theological development rather than from historical events.[277] Michael Coogan says that Paul considered Jesus to have been conceived by Joseph.[285] Other scholars take it as significant that the virgin birth is attested by two separate gospels, Matthew and Luke,[286][287][288][289][290][291] (see the criterion of multiple attestation).

The two different genealogies in Matthew and Luke each show Jesus as a direct descendant of King David, one of Jesus' main predecessors in salvation history.[292] According to E. P. Sanders, both genealogies are based not on historical information but on the authors' desire to show that Jesus was the universal Jewish savior.[292] Jesus' family may have considered themselves to be descended from the House of David, but it is impossible to say.[282] In any event, once the doctrine of Jesus' virgin birth became established, that tradition superseded the earlier tradition that he was descended from David through Joseph.[293]

Luke reports that Jesus was related to John the Baptist, but scholars general consider this connection to be invented.[292][294]

Baptism and John the Baptist
Most modern scholars consider Jesus' baptism to be a definite historical fact, along with his crucifixion.[7] James D.G. Dunn states that they "command almost universal assent" and "rank so high on the 'almost impossible to doubt or deny' scale of historical facts" that they are often the starting points for the study of the historical Jesus.[7] Scholars adduce the criterion of embarrassment, saying that early Christians would not have invented a baptism that might imply that Jesus committed sins and wanted to repent.[295][296]

John's ministry was one of many renewal movements that sought to strengthen Judaism against the pressure of Hellenistic influence.[297] His movement was unusual in that it opposed the Jewish leadership rather than the Roman occupiers.[297] He was the first of many 1st-century prophets who raised hopes for divine intervention.[297] Jesus was inspired by John and took over from him many elements of his teaching.[298] Jesus' teaching, however, emphasized grace and forgiveness over judgment.[298]

Ministry in Galilee
Most scholars hold that Jesus lived in Galilee and Judea and did not preach or study elsewhere.[299] They agree that Jesus debated with Jewish authorities on the subject of God, performed some healings, taught in parables and gathered followers.[26] According to E. P. Sanders, Jesus may well have debated other Jews about how to interpret the Law and the Sabbath, as recorded in the Synoptics.[300] Sanders, however, concludes that it is not plausible that these disagreements would have led Jewish authorities to want Jesus killed, as the Synoptics report.[300]

Jesus' parables about the Kingdom of God used striking and original imagery, such as likening it to a tiny mustard seed or to leaven.[75] In Jesus' teaching, the coming kingdom was everyone's proper focus, not anything in this life.[301] He taught about the Jewish Law, seeking its true meaning, sometimes in opposition to other traditions.[302] He put love at the center of the Law, and following that Law was an apocalyptic necessity.[302] His ethical teachings called for forgiveness, not judging others, loving enemies, and caring for the poor.[303] Typical of Jesus were paradoxical or surprising turns of phrase, such as advising one, when struck on the cheek, to offer the other cheek to be struck as well (Luke 6:29).[304] Jesus' Jewish critics considered his ministry to be scandalous because he feasted with sinners, fraternized with women, and allowed his followers to pluck grain on the Sabbath.[75]

Jesus was an exorcist, as demonstrated by Graham H. Twelftree.[83] The stories of Jesus exorcising demons occur only in the earliest traditions and were not added by later writers.[83][305] While Jesus' miracles fit within the social context of antiquity, he defined them differently. First, he attributed them to the faith of those healed. Second, he connected them to end times prophecy.[92] Jesus' healings were long considered literally true and sometimes dismissed as fraudulent, but today an understanding of psychosomatic therapy leads more people to believe that faith healing could be possible.[306]

Historians say Jesus called disciples as part of his ministry.[307] Jesus chose twelve disciples (the "Twelve"), evidently as an apocalyptic message.[308] All three Synoptics mention the Twelve, although the names on Luke's list vary from those in Mark and Matthew, suggesting that Christians weren't sure who all the disciples were.[308] E. P. Sanders says that 12 may have been a symbolic number, and that the number of actual disciples might have varied.[309] The twelve disciples represented the twelve original tribes of Israel, which would be restored once God's rule was instituted.[308] The disciples were reportedly meant to be the rulers of the tribes in the coming Kingdom (Matthew 19:28, Luke 22:30).[308] According to Bart Ehrman, Jesus' promise that the Twelve would rule is historical because the Twelve included Judas, and no Christians would have invented a line from Jesus promising rulership to the disciple who betrayed him.[308] In Mark, the disciples play hardly any role other than a negative one. While other sometimes respond to Jesus with complete faith, his disciples are puzzled and doubtful.[310] They serve as a foil to Jesus and to other characters.[310] The failings of the disciples are probably exaggerated in Mark, and the disciples make a better showing in Matthew and Luke.[310]

Role
Jesus taught that an apocalyptic figure, the "Son of Man," would soon come on clouds of glory to gather the elect, or chosen ones (Mark 13:24-27, Matthew 24:29-31, Luke 21:25-28). He referred to himself as a "son of man" in the colloquial sense of "a person," but historians don't know whether he also meant himself when he referred to the heavenly "Son of Man." Paul and other early Christians interpreted the "Son of Man" as the risen Jesus.[27]

The title Christ, or Messiah, indicates that Jesus' followers believed him to be the anointed heir of King David, whom some Jews expected to save Israel. The Gospels refer to him not only as a Messiah but in the absolute form as "the Messiah" or, equivalently, "the Christ." In early Judaism, this absolute form of the title is not found, but only phrases such as "his Messiah". The tradition is ambiguous enough to leave room for debate as to whether Jesus defined his eschatological role as that of the Messiah.[311] The Jewish messianic tradition included many different forms, some of them focused on a Messiah figure and others not.[312] Based on the Christian tradition, Gerd Theissen advances the hypothesis that Jesus saw himself in messianic terms but did not claim the title "Messiah."[312] Bart Ehrman argues that Jesus did consider himself to be the Messiah, albeit in the sense that he would be the king of the new political order that God would usher in,[313] not in the sense that most people today think of the term.[314]

Crucifixion in Jerusalem
Around AD 30, Jesus and his followers traveled from Galilee to Jerusalem to observe Passover..[307] While in Jerusalem, Jesus caused a disturbance in the Temple,[315] which was the center of Jewish religious and civil authority. He evidently had a last meal with his disciples, and then he was arrested and tried by the Jewish authorities..[315] Jesus was executed on the orders of Pontius Pilate, the Roman prefect..[315]

Most scholars consider Jesus' crucifixion to be factual because early Christians would not have invented the painful death of their leader.[7][316] It is more likely that the Sadducean high-priestly leaders of the Temple had Jesus executed for political reasons than for his teaching. They may have regarded him as a threat to stability, especially after he caused a disturbance at the Temple.[135][46] Other factors, such as Jesus' triumphal entry into Jerusalem, may have contributed to this decision. Pilate most likely saw Jesus' reference to the Kingdom of God as a threat to Roman authority and worked with the Temple elites to have Jesus executed.[317][318]

Post-crucifixion

The Resurrection of Christ from a 16th-century copy of La Passion de Nostre Seigneur
After Jesus' death, his followers said he rose from the dead, although exact details of their experiences are unclear. Some of those who claimed to have witnessed Jesus' resurrection later died for their belief, which indicates that their beliefs were likely genuine.[319] According to E. P. Sanders, the Gospel reports contradict each other, which, according to him, suggests competition among those claiming to have seen him first rather than deliberate fraud.[320] On the other hand, L. Michael White suggests that inconsistencies in the Gospels reflect differences in the agendas of their unknown authors.[74] The followers of Jesus formed a community to wait for his return and the founding of his kingdom.[315]

Portraits of Jesus
Main article: Historical Jesus
Modern research on the historical Jesus has not led to a unified picture of the historical figure, partly because of the variety of academic traditions represented by the scholars.[321] Given the scarcity of historical sources, it is generally difficult for any scholar to construct a portrait of Jesus that can be considered historically valid beyond the basic elements of his life.[94][95] The portraits of Jesus constructed in these quests often differ from each other, and from the image portrayed in the gospels.[322][323]

Contemporary scholarship, representing the "third quest," places Jesus firmly in the Jewish tradition. Leading scholars in the "third quest" include E. P. Sanders, Geza Vermes, Gerd Theissen, Christoph Burchard, and John Dominic Crossan. Jesus is seen as the founder of, in the words of E. P. Sanders, a '"renewal movement within Judaism." This scholarship suggests a continuity between Jesus' life as a wandering charismatic and the same lifestyle carried forward by followers after his death. The main criterion used to discern historical details in the "third quest" is the criterion of plausibility, relative to Jesus' Jewish context and to his influence on Christianity. The main disagreement in contemporary research is whether Jesus was apocalyptic. Most scholars conclude that he was an apocalyptic preacher, like John the Baptist and the apostle Paul. In contrast, certain prominent North American scholars, such as Burton Mack and John Dominic Crossan, advocate for a non-eschatological Jesus, one who is more of a Cynic sage than an apocalyptic preacher.[28] In addition to portraying Jesus as an apocalyptic prophet, a charismatic healer or a cynic philosopher, some scholars portray him as the true Messiah or an egalitarian prophet of social change.[324][325] However, the attributes described in the portraits sometimes overlap, and scholars who differ on some attributes sometimes agree on others.[326]

Since the 18th century, scholars have occasionally put forth that Jesus was a political national messiah, but the evidence for this portrait is negligible. Likewise, the proposal that Jesus was a Zealot does not fit with the earliest strata of the Synoptic tradition.[135]

Language, ethnicity, and appearance
Further information: Language of Jesus and Race and appearance of Jesus
Twelve depictions of Jesus from around the world
The representation of the ethnicity of Jesus has been influenced by cultural settings.[327][328]
Jesus grew up in Galilee and much of his ministry took place there.[329] The languages spoken in Galilee and Judea during the first century AD include Jewish Palestinian Aramaic, Hebrew, and Greek, with Aramaic being predominant.[330][331] There is substantial consensus that Jesus gave most of his teachings in Aramaic.[332]

Modern scholars agree that Jesus was a Jew of first-century Palestine.[333][334] Ioudaios in New Testament Greek[i] is a term which in the contemporary context may refer to religion (Second Temple Judaism), ethnicity (of Judea), or both.[336][337][338] In a review of the state of modern scholarship, Amy-Jill Levine writes that the entire question of ethnicity is "fraught with difficulty," and that "beyond recognizing that 'Jesus was Jewish', rarely does the scholarship address what being 'Jewish' means".[339]

The New Testament gives no description of the physical appearance of Jesus before his deathit is generally indifferent to racial appearances and does not refer to the features of the people it mentions.[340][341][342] Jesus probably looked like a typical Jew of his time and according to some scholars was likely to have had a sinewy appearance due to his ascetic and itinerant lifestyle.[343]

Christ myth theory
Main article: Christ myth theory
The Christ myth theory is the hypothesis that Jesus of Nazareth never existed; or if he did, that he had virtually nothing to do with the founding of Christianity and the accounts in the gospels.[344] Bruno Bauer (1809C1882) taught that the first Gospel was a work of literature that produced history rather than described it.[345] According to Albert Kalthoff (1850C1906) a social movement produced Jesus when it encountered Jewish messianic expectations.[345] Arthur Drews (1865C1935) saw Jesus as the concrete form of a myth that predated Christianity.[345] Despite arguments put forward by authors who have questioned the existence of a historical Jesus, there remains a strong consensus in historical-critical biblical scholarship that a historical Jesus did live in that area and in that time period.[346][347][348][349][350][351][352]

Perspectives
Main article: Religious perspectives on Jesus
Apart from his own disciples and followers, the Jews of Jesus' day generally rejected him as the Messiah, as do the great majority of Jews today. Christian theologians, ecumenical councils, reformers and others have written extensively about Jesus over the centuries. Christian sects and schisms have often been defined or characterized by their descriptions of Jesus. Meanwhile, Manichaeans, Gnostics, Muslims, Baha'is, and others have found prominent places for Jesus in their religions.[353][354][355] Jesus has also had detractors, both past and present.

Christian
Main articles: Jesus in Christianity, Christ, and Christology

The Trinity is the belief in Christianity that God is one God in three persons: God the Father, God the Son (Jesus), and God the Holy Spirit

Jesus is depicted with the Alpha and Omega letters in the catacombs of Rome from the 4th century
Jesus is the central figure of Christianity.[14] Although Christian views of Jesus vary, it is possible to summarize the key beliefs shared among major denominations, as stated in their catechetical or confessional texts.[356][357][358] Christian views of Jesus are derived from various sources, including the canonical gospels and New Testament letters such as the Pauline epistles and the Johannine writings. These documents outline the key beliefs held by Christians about Jesus, including his divinity, humanity, and earthly life, and that he is the Christ and the Son of God.[359] Despite their many shared beliefs, not all Christian denominations agree on all doctrines, and both major and minor differences on teachings and beliefs have persisted throughout Christianity for centuries.[360]

The New Testament states that the resurrection of Jesus is the foundation of the Christian faith (1 Corinthians 15:12C20).[361] Christians believe that through his sacrificial death and resurrection, humans can be reconciled with God and are thereby offered salvation and the promise of eternal life.[36] Recalling the words of John the Baptist on the day after Jesus' baptism, these doctrines sometimes refer to Jesus as the Lamb of God, who was crucified to fulfill his role as the servant of God.[362][363] Jesus is thus seen as the new and last Adam, whose obedience contrasts with Adam's disobedience.[364] Christians view Jesus as a role model, whose God-focused life believers are encouraged to imitate.[14]

Most Christians believe that Jesus was both human and the Son of God. While there has been theological debate over his nature,[j] Some early Christians viewed Jesus as subordinate to the Father, and others considered him an aspect of the Father rather than a separate person.[27][365] The Church resolved the issues in ancient councils, which established the Holy Trinity, with Jesus both fully human and fully God.[27] Trinitarian Christians generally believe that Jesus is the Logos, God's incarnation and God the Son, both fully divine and fully human. However, the doctrine of the Trinity is not universally accepted among Christians.[366][367] With the Protestant Reformation, Christians such as Michael Servetus and the Socinians started questioning the ancient creeds that had established Jesus' two natures.[27] Nontrinitarian Christian groups include The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,[368] Unitarians and Jehovah's Witnesses.[365]

Christians revere not only Jesus himself, but also his name. Devotions to the Holy Name of Jesus go back to the earliest days of Christianity.[369][370] These devotions and feasts exist in both Eastern and Western Christianity.[370]

In the 20th century, Protestant groups became sharply divided in terms of how much they support historical and critical inquiry into the person of Jesus. Protestant denominations allow some such investigation but differ in how far the investigation may go. The Roman Catholic Church drew definite limits, and Catholic scholars have engaged in considerable critical study within those limits.[27] Some liberal theologians have come to doubt miracles such as the virgin birth.[371]

Jewish
Main article: Judaism's view of Jesus
See also: Jesus in the Talmud
Judaism rejects the idea of Jesus being God, or a mediator to God, or part of a Trinity.[372] It holds that Jesus is not the Messiah, arguing that he neither fulfilled the Messianic prophecies in the Tanakh nor embodied the personal qualifications of the Messiah.[373] According to Jewish tradition, there were no prophets after Malachi,[374] who delivered his prophesies in the fifth century BC.[375] Although currently disputed,[376]David Flusser offers the Pharisee, Joshua b. Perahyah, as a possible rabbi of Jesus, but likens his social outlook to that of the Essenes and his prophetic stance to that of John the Baptist.[377]

Judaic criticism of Jesus is long-standing. The Talmud, written and compiled from the third to the fifth century AD,[378] includes stories that since medieval times have been considered to be defamatory accounts of Jesus.[379] In one such story, Yeshu ha-nozri ("Jesus the Christian"), a lewd apostate, is executed by the Jewish high court for spreading idolatry and practicing magic.[380] The majority of contemporary historians consider that this material provides no information on the historical Jesus.[381] The Mishneh Torah, a late 12th-century work of Jewish law written by Moses Maimonides, states that Jesus is a "stumbling block" who makes "the majority of the world to err and serve a god other than the Lord".[382]

Islamic
Main article: Jesus in Islam
Muhammad, surrounded by fire, is depicted on the right. Jesus and others are on the left
Muhammad leads Jesus, Abraham, Moses and others in prayer. Medieval Persian miniature.
A major figure in Islam, Jesus (commonly transliterated as ?s) is considered to be a messenger of God (Allah) and the Messiah (al-Masih) who was sent to guide the Children of Israel (Bani Isra'il) with a new scripture, the Gospel (referred to in Islam as Injil).[43][383] Muslims regard the gospels of the New Testament as inauthentic, and believe that Jesus' original message was lost or altered and that Muhammad came later to restore it.[384] Belief in Jesus (and all other messengers of God) is a requirement for being a Muslim.[385] The Quran mentions Jesus by name 25 timesmore often than Muhammad[386][387]and emphasizes that Jesus was a mortal human who, like all other prophets, had been divinely chosen to spread God's message.[388] While the Qur'an acknowledges the Virgin birth of Jesus, He is considered to be neither the incarnation nor the son of God. Islamic texts emphasize a strict notion of monotheism (tawhid) and forbid the association of partners with God, which would be idolatry.[389] Like all prophets in Islam, Jesus is considered a Muslim.[390]

The Quran describes the annunciation to Mary (Maryam) by an angel that she is to give birth to Jesus while remaining a virgin. It calls the virgin birth a miracle that occurred by the will of God.[391][392] The Quran (21:91 and 66:12) states that God breathed his spirit into Mary while she was chaste.[391][392] Jesus is called the "Spirit of God" because he was born through the action of the Spirit,[391] but that belief does not imply his pre-existence.[393]

To aid in his ministry to the Jewish people, Jesus was given the ability to perform miracles, by permission of God rather than by his own power.[44] Through his ministry, Jesus is seen as a precursor to Muhammad.[388] According to the Quran, Jesus was not crucified but was merely made to appear that way to unbelievers by Allah,[394] who physically raised Jesus into the heavens.[395] To Muslims, it is the ascension rather than the crucifixion that constitutes a major event in the life of Jesus.[396] Most Muslims believe that Jesus will return to earth at the end of time and defeat the Antichrist (ad-Dajjal) by killing him in Lud.[43]

The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community has several distinct teachings about Jesus. Ahmadis believe that he was a mortal man who survived his crucifixion and died a natural death at the age of 120 in Kashmir, India.[397]

Bah'
Bah' teachings consider Jesus to be a manifestation of God, a Bah' concept for prophets[398]intermediaries between God and humanity, serving as messengers and reflecting God's qualities and attributes.[399] The Bah' concept emphasizes the simultaneous qualities of humanity and divinity;[399] thus, it is similar to the Christian concept of incarnation.[398] Bah' thought accepts Jesus as the Son of God.[400] In Bah' thought, Jesus was a perfect incarnation of God's attributes, but Bah' teachings reject the idea that "ineffable essence" of the Divinity was contained within a single human body because of their beliefs regarding "omnipresence and transcendence of the essence of God".[398]

Bah'u'llh, the founder of the Bah' Faith, wrote that since each manifestation of God has the same divine attributes, they can be seen as the spiritual "return" of all previous manifestations of God, and the appearance of each new manifestation of God inaugurates a religion that supersedes the former ones, a concept known as progressive revelation.[399] Bah's believe that God's plan unfolds gradually through this process as mankind matures, and that some of the manifestations arrive in specific fulfillment of the missions of previous ones. Thus, Bah's believe that Bah'u'llh is the promised return of Christ.[401] Bah' teachings confirm many, but not all, aspects of Jesus as portrayed in the gospels. Bah's believe in the virgin birth and in the Crucifixion,[402][403] but see the Resurrection and the miracles of Jesus as symbolic.[400][403]

Other
See also: Criticism of Jesus
In Christian Gnosticism (now a largely extinct religious movement),[404] Jesus was sent from the divine realm and provided the secret knowledge (gnosis) necessary for salvation. Most Gnostics believed that Jesus was a human who became possessed by the spirit of "the Christ" at his baptism. This spirit left Jesus' body during the crucifixion, but was rejoined to him when he was raised from the dead. Some Gnostics, however, were docetics, believed that Jesus did not have a physical body, but only appeared to possess one.[405] Manichaeism, a Gnostic sect, accepted Jesus as a prophet, in addition to revering Gautama Buddha and Zoroaster.[406][407]

Some Hindus consider Jesus to be an avatar or a sadhu and point out similarities between Krishna and Jesus' teachings.[408][409] Paramahansa Yogananda, an Indian guru, taught that Jesus was the reincarnation of Elisha and a student of John the Baptist, the reincarnation of Elijah.[410] Some Buddhists, including Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, regard Jesus as a bodhisattva who dedicated his life to the welfare of people.[411] Disciples of the Cao ?i religion worship Jesus Christ as a major religious teacher.[412] He is revealed during communication with Divine Beings as the spirit of their Supreme Being (God the Father) together with other major religious teachers and founders like the Gautama Buddha, Laozi, and Confucius.[413] The New Age movement entertains a wide variety of views on Jesus.[414] Theosophists, from whom many New Age teachings originated,[415] refer to Jesus as the Master Jesus and believe that Christ, after various incarnations, occupied the body of Jesus.[416] Scientologists recognize Jesus (along with other religious figures such as Zoroaster, Muhammad, and Buddha) as part of their "religious heritage".[414][417] Atheists reject Jesus' divinity, but not all hold a negative estimation of him; Richard Dawkins, for instance, refers to Jesus as "a great moral teacher",[418] while stating in his book The God Delusion that Jesus is praiseworthy because he did not derive his ethics from biblical scripture.[419]

Jesus had detractors, both past and present, as well. Early critics of Jesus and Christianity included Celsus in the second century and Porphyry in the third.[420][421] In the 19th century, Nietzsche was highly critical of Jesus, whose teachings he considered to be "anti-nature" in their treatment of topics such as sexuality.[422] Other notable modern critics of Jesus include Sita Ram Goel, Christopher Hitchens, Bertrand Russell, and Dayananda Saraswati. In the 20th century, Russell wrote in Why I Am Not a Christian that Jesus was "not so wise as some other people have been, and He was certainly not superlatively wise".[423] Russell called Jesus vindictive nature a defect in his moral character in that Jesus in the Gospels believed in the everlasting punishment of hell, which Russell felt that no one who is "really profoundly humane can believe in".[424] Russell also notes a repeated "vindictive fury against those people who would not listen to His preaching" which he felt "detract[s] from superlative excellence".[424]

Depictions
Main article: Depiction of Jesus
An ancient wall painting depicting Jesus
Jesus healing a paralytic in one of the first known images of Jesus from Dura Europos in the 2nd century
Some of the earliest depictions of Jesus at the Dura-Europos church are firmly dated to before 256.[425] Thereafter, despite the lack of biblical references or historical records, a wide range of depictions of Jesus appeared during the last two millennia, often influenced by cultural settings, political circumstances and theological contexts.[327][328][341] As in other Early Christian art, the earliest depictions date to the late second or early third century, and surviving images are found especially in the Catacombs of Rome.[426]

The depiction of Christ in pictorial form was highly controversial in the early church.[427][428][429] From the 5th century onward, flat painted icons became popular in the Eastern Church.[430] The Byzantine Iconoclasm acted as a barrier to developments in the East, but by the ninth century, art was permitted again.[327] The Transfiguration was a major theme in Eastern Christian art, and every Eastern Orthodox monk who had trained in icon painting had to prove his craft by painting an icon depicting it.[431] Icons receive the external marks of veneration, such as kisses and prostration, and they are thought to be powerful channels of divine grace.[430]

Before the Protestant Reformation, the crucifix was common in Western Christianity. It is a model of the cross with Jesus crucified on it. The crucifix became the central ornament of the altar in the 13th century, a use that has been nearly universal in Roman Catholic churches until recent times.[432]

Jesus appears as an infant in a manger (feed trough) in Christmas creches, which depict the Nativity scene.[433] He is typically joined by Mary, Joseph, animals, shepherds, angels, and the Magi.[433] Francis of Assisi (1181/82C1226) is credited with popularizing the creche, although he probably did not initiate it.[433] The creche reached its height of popularity in the 17th and 18th centuries in southern Europe.[433]

The Renaissance brought forth a number of artists who focused on depictions of Jesus; Fra Angelico and others followed Giotto in the systematic development of uncluttered images.[327]

The Protestant Reformation brought renewed resistance to imagery, but total prohibition was atypical, and Protestant objections to images have tended to reduce since the 16th century. Although large images are generally avoided, few Protestants now object to book illustrations depicting Jesus.[434][435] The use of depictions of Jesus is advocated by the leaders of denominations such as Anglicans and Catholics[436][437][438] and is a key element of the Eastern Orthodox tradition.[439][440]

Associated relics
Main article: Relics associated with Jesus
The total destruction that ensued with the siege of Jerusalem by the Romans in AD 70 made the survival of items from first century Judea very rare and almost no direct records survive about the history of Judaism from the last part of the first century through the second century.[441][442][k] Margaret M. Mitchell writes that although Eusebius reports (Ecclesiastical History III 5.3) that the early Christians left Jerusalem for Pella just before Jerusalem was subjected to the final lock down, we must accept that no first hand Christian items from the early Jerusalem Church have reached us.[444] However, throughout the history of Christianity a number of relics attributed to Jesus have been claimed, although doubt has been cast on them. The 16th-century Catholic theologian Erasmus wrote sarcastically about the proliferation of relics and the number of buildings that could have been constructed from the wood claimed to be from the cross used in the Crucifixion.[445] Similarly, while experts debate whether Jesus was crucified with three nails or with four, at least thirty holy nails continue to be venerated as relics across Europe.[446]

Some relics, such as purported remnants of the Crown of Thorns, receive only a modest number of pilgrims, while the Shroud of Turin (which is associated with an approved Catholic devotion to the Holy Face of Jesus), have received millions,[447] including popes John Paul II and Benedict XVI.[448][449] There is no scholarly consensus in favor for the authenticity of any relic attributed to Jesus.[450][l]

See also
Book icon	
Book: Jesus
Jesuism
List of founders of religious traditions
List of people who have been considered deities
List of books about Jesus
List of people claimed to be Jesus
Portals
Access related topics	
icon	Christianity portal
	Islam portal
icon	Religion portal
Find out more on Wikipedia's
Sister projects	
	Media
from Commons
	Definitions
from Wiktionary
	Textbooks
from Wikibooks
	Quotations
from Wikiquote
	Source texts
from Wikisource
	Learning resources
from Wikiversity
	Data
from Wikidata
Notes
Explanatory
Jump up ^ Meier writes that Jesus' birth year is c. 7 or 6 BC.[1] Rahner states that the consensus among historians is c. 4 BC.[2] Sanders also favors c. 4 BC and refers to the general consensus.[3] Finegan uses the study of early Christian traditions to support c. 3 or 2 BC.[4]
Jump up ^ Most scholars estimate AD 30 or 33 as the year of Jesus' crucifixion.[6]
Jump up ^ James Dunn writes that the baptism and crucifixion of Jesus "command almost universal assent" and "rank so high on the "almost impossible to doubt or deny" scale of historical facts" that they are often the starting points for the study of the historical Jesus.[7] Bart Ehrman states that the crucifixion of Jesus on the orders of Pontius Pilate is the most certain element about him.[8] John Dominic Crossan and Richard G. Watts state that the crucifixion of Jesus is as certain as any historical fact can be.[9] Paul R. Eddy and Gregory A. Boyd say that non-Christian confirmation of the crucifixion of Jesus is now "firmly established".[10]
Jump up ^ Traditionally, Christians believe that Mary conceived her son miraculously by the agency of the Holy Spirit. Muslims believe that she conceived her son miraculously by the command of God. Joseph was from these perspectives the acting adoptive father.
Jump up ^ The New Testament records a variety of names and titles accorded to Jesus.
^ Jump up to: a b In a 2011 review of the state of modern scholarship, Bart Ehrman wrote, "He certainly existed, as virtually every competent scholar of antiquity, Christian or non-Christian, agrees".[16] Richard A. Burridge states: "There are those who argue that Jesus is a figment of the Church's imagination, that there never was a Jesus at all. I have to say that I do not know any respectable critical scholar who says that any more".[17] Robert M. Price does not believe that Jesus existed, but agrees that this perspective runs against the views of the majority of scholars.[18] James D.G. Dunn calls the theories of Jesus' non-existence "a thoroughly dead thesis".[19] Michael Grant (a classicist) wrote in 1977, "In recent years, 'no serious scholar has ventured to postulate the non historicity of Jesus' or at any rate very few, and they have not succeeded in disposing of the much stronger, indeed very abundant, evidence to the contrary".[20] Robert E. Van Voorst states that biblical scholars and classical historians regard theories of non-existence of Jesus as effectively refuted.[21]
Jump up ^ This article uses quotes from the New Revised Standard Version of the Bible.
Jump up ^ For example, John P. Meier states that Jesus' birth year is c. 7/6 BC,[1] while Finegan favors c. 3/2 BC.[4]
Jump up ^ In the New Testament, Jesus is described as Jewish / Judean (Ioudaios as written in Koine Greek) on three occasions: by the Magi in Matthew 2, who referred to Jesus as "King of the Jews" (basileus ton ioudaion); by both the Samaritan woman at the well and by Jesus himself in John 4; and (in all four gospels) during the Passion, by the Romans, who also used the phrase "King of the Jews".[335]
Jump up ^ Following the Apostolic Age, there was fierce and often politicized debate in the early church on many interrelated issues. Christology was a major focus of these debates, and was addressed at every one of the first seven ecumenical councils.
Jump up ^ Flavius Josephus writing (about 5 years later, c. AD 75) in the The Jewish War (Book VII 1.1) stated that Jerusalem had been flattened to the point that "there was left nothing to make those that came thither believe it had ever been inhabited."[443] And once what was left of the ruins of Jerusalem had been turned into the Roman settlement of Aelia Capitolina, no Jews were allowed to set foot in it.[442]
Jump up ^ Polarized conclusions regarding the Shroud of Turin remain.[451] According to former Nature editor Philip Ball, "it's fair to say that, despite the seemingly definitive tests in 1988, the status of the Shroud of Turin is murkier than ever. Not least, the nature of the image and how it was fixed on the cloth remain deeply puzzling".[452]
Citations
^ Jump up to: a b Meier, John P. (1991). A Marginal Jew: The roots of the problem and the person. Yale University Press. p. 407. ISBN 978-0-300-14018-7.
Jump up ^ Rahner 2004, p. 732.
Jump up ^ Sanders 1993, pp. 10C11.
^ Jump up to: a b Finegan, Jack (1998). Handbook of Biblical Chronology, rev. ed. Hendrickson Publishers. p. 319. ISBN 978-1-56563-143-4.
Jump up ^ Brown, Raymond E. (1977). The birth of the Messiah: a commentary on the infancy narratives in Matthew and Luke. Doubleday. p. 513. ISBN 978-0-385-05907-7.
^ Jump up to: a b c Humphreys, Colin J.; Waddington, W. G. (1992). "The Jewish Calendar, a Lunar Eclipse and the Date of Christ's Crucifixion" (PDF). Tyndale Bulletin 43 (2): 340.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Dunn 2003, p. 339.
Jump up ^ Ehrman 1999, p. 101.
Jump up ^ Crossan & Watts 1999, p. 96.
Jump up ^ Eddy & Boyd 2007, p. 173.
^ Jump up to: a b Theissen & Merz 1998.
Jump up ^ "The New Strong's Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible (Nashville: Thomas Nelson Publishers 1990)
Jump up ^ Vermes, Geza (1981). Jesus the Jew: A Historian's Reading of the Gospels. Philadelphia: First Fortress. pp. 20, 26, 27, 29. ISBN 0-8006-1443-7.
^ Jump up to: a b c d McGrath 2006, pp. 4C6.
^ Jump up to: a b Ehrman, Bart D. (2014). How Jesus became God: The Exaltation of a Jewish Preacher from Galilee. HarperOne. ISBN 978-0061778186.
Jump up ^ Ehrman, Bart (2011). Forged: writing in the name of God C Why the Bible's Authors Are Not Who We Think They Are. HarperCollins. p. 285. ISBN 978-0-06-207863-6.
Jump up ^ Burridge, Richard A.; Gould, Graham (2004). Jesus Now and Then. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 34. ISBN 978-0-8028-0977-3.
Jump up ^ Price, Robert M. (2009). "Jesus at the Vanishing Point". In Beilby, James K.; Eddy, Paul R. The Historical Jesus: Five Views. InterVarsity. pp. 55, 61. ISBN 978-0-8308-7853-6.
Jump up ^ Sykes, Stephen W. (2007). "Paul's understanding of the death of Jesus". Sacrifice and Redemption. Cambridge University Press. pp. 35C36. ISBN 978-0-521-04460-8.
Jump up ^ Grant, Michael (1977). Jesus: An Historian's Review of the Gospels. Scribner's. p. 200. ISBN 978-0-684-14889-2.
Jump up ^ Van Voorst 2000, p. 16.
Jump up ^ Sanders 1993, pp. 73.
Jump up ^ Theissen & Merz 1998, p. 25.
Jump up ^ Hezser, Catherine (1997). The Social Structure of the Rabbinic Movement in Roman Palestine. p. 59.
Jump up ^ Dunn, James D. G. (2013). The Oral Gospel Tradition. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 290C291.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Levine 2006, p. 4.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e f g h i j k l m Sanders, Ed P.; Pelikan, Jaroslav J. "Jesus Christ". Encyclop?dia Britannica. Retrieved June 10, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 1C15.
Jump up ^ Sanders 1993, pp. 11, 14.
Jump up ^ "anno Domini". Collins English Dictionary.
Jump up ^ "anno Domini". American Heritage Dictionary. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Jump up ^ BBC Team (8 February 2005). "History of Judaism 63BCEC1086CE". BBC Religion & Ethics. British Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 2016-04-20. Year 1: CE C What is nowadays called the 'Current Era' traditionally begins with the birth of a Jewish teacher called Jesus. His followers came to believe he was the promised Messiah and later split away from Judaism to found Christianity.
Jump up ^ Woodhead, Linda (2004). Christianity: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. n.p.
Jump up ^ Grudem 1994, pp. 568C603.
Jump up ^ Wilhelm, Joseph (1911). "The Nicene Creed". The Catholic Encyclopedia 11. Robert Appleton Company.
^ Jump up to: a b Metzger, Bruce M.; Coogan, Michael D. (1993). Oxford Companion to the Bible. Oxford University Press. p. 649. ISBN 978-0-19-974391-9.
Jump up ^ Tabor, James. "What the Bible Says About Death, Afterlife, and the Future". UNCC.
Jump up ^ Hoekema, Anthony A. (1994). The Bible and the Future. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 88C89.
Jump up ^ Garrett, James L. (2014). Systematic Theology, Volume 2, Second Edition: Biblical, Historical, and Evangelical. Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 766.
Jump up ^ Erickson, Millard J. (2001). The Concise Dictionary of Christian Theology. Baker Books. p. 95.
Jump up ^ Richard Bauckham, "Universalism: a historical survey", Themelios 4.2 (September 1978): 47C54.
Jump up ^ "Quran 3:46-158".
^ Jump up to: a b c Glass, Cyril (2008). Concise Encyclopedia of Islam. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 270C271. ISBN 978-0-7425-6296-7.
^ Jump up to: a b Morgan, Diane (2010). Essential Islam: A Comprehensive Guide to Belief and Practice. ABC-CLIO. pp. 45C46. ISBN 978-0-313-36025-1.
Jump up ^ Understanding Islam: Basic Principles. Garnet & Ithaca Press. 2000. pp. 71C73. ISBN 978-1-85964-134-7.
^ Jump up to: a b Jacobs, Joseph; Kohler, Kaufmann; Gottheil, Richard; Krauss, Samuel. "Jesus of Nazareth". Jewish Encyclopedia.
^ Jump up to: a b Wikisource-logo.svg Maas, Anthony J. (1913). "Origin of the Name of Jesus Christ". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Jump up ^ Wycliffe Bible Dictionary. entry HEBREW LANGUAGE: Hendrickson Publishers. 1975.
Jump up ^ Ehrman, Bart D. (2012). Did Jesus Exist?: The Historical Argument for Jesus of Nazareth. HarperOne. p. 29. ISBN 978-0-06-208994-6.
Jump up ^ "Joshua". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved August 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ Hare, Douglas (2009). Matthew. Westminster John Knox Press. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-664-23433-1.
Jump up ^ Rogers, Cleon (1999). Topical Josephus. Zondervan. p. 12. ISBN 9780310230175.
Jump up ^ Eddy & Boyd 2007, p. 129.
Jump up ^ France 2007, p. 53.
Jump up ^ Doninger 1999, p. 212.
Jump up ^ Heil, John P. (2010). Philippians: Let Us Rejoice in Being Conformed to Christ. Society of Biblical Lit. p. 66. ISBN 978-1-58983-482-8.
Jump up ^ Gwynn, Murl E. (2011). Conflict: Christianity's Love Vs. Islam's Submission. iUniverse. p. 92. ISBN 978-1-4620-3484-0.
Jump up ^ Vine 1940, pp. 274C275.
Jump up ^ Pannenberg 1968, pp. 30C31.
Jump up ^ Bultmann, Rudolf K. (2007). Theology of the New Testament. Baylor University Press. p. 80. ISBN 1-932792-93-7.
Jump up ^ Mills & Bullard 1998, p. 142.
Jump up ^ "G5546 ??". Strong's Greek Lexicon. Retrieved July 22, 2013.
Jump up ^ Sanders, E. P. "Jesus Christ." Encyclopedia Britannica Online. Retrieved 17 Dec 2015.
Jump up ^ Blomberg 2009, pp. 441C442.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Fahlbusch, Erwin (2005). The Encyclopedia of Christianity 4. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 53C56. ISBN 978-0-8028-2416-5.
^ Jump up to: a b c Evans 2003, pp. 465C477.
Jump up ^ Bruce, Frederick F. (1988). The Book of the Acts. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 362. ISBN 978-0-8028-2505-6.
Jump up ^ Rausch 2003, p. 77.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Evans 2003, pp. 521C530.
Jump up ^ Brown 1997, pp. 835C840.
Jump up ^ Chilton & Evans 1998, p. 482.
Jump up ^ Roberts, Mark D. (2007). Can We Trust the Gospels?: Investigating the Reliability of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Crossway. p. 58. ISBN 978-1-4335-1978-9.
Jump up ^ Humphreys, Colin J. (2011). The Mystery of the Last Supper: Reconstructing the Final Days of Jesus. Cambridge University Press. pp. 7C8. ISBN 978-1-139-49631-5.
^ Jump up to: a b c White, L. Michael (2010). Scripting Jesus: The Gospels in Rewrite. HarperOne.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v Funk, Robert W.; Hoover, Roy W. (1993). The Five Gospels. Harper. p. 3.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e May, Herbert G. and Bruce M. Metzger. The New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha. 1977. "Mark" p. 1213-1239
Jump up ^ Cross 2005, John, St..
^ Jump up to: a b Haffner, Paul (2008). New Testament Theology. p. 135. ISBN 978-88-902268-0-9.
^ Jump up to: a b Scroggie, W. Graham (1995). A Guide to the Gospels. Kregel Publications. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-8254-9571-7.
Jump up ^ "synoptic". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. September 2005. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
Jump up ^ Moloney, Francis J.; Harrington, Daniel J. (1998). The Gospel of John. Liturgical Press. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-8146-5806-2.
Jump up ^ Ladd, George E. (1993). A Theology of the New Testament. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 251. ISBN 978-0-8028-0680-2.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Witherington 1997, pp. 113.
Jump up ^ Licona 2010, pp. 210C21.
Jump up ^ Sanders 1993, p. 71.
^ Jump up to: a b c Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 17C62.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Sanders 1993, p. 3.
Jump up ^ Crossan & Watts 1999, p. 108.
Jump up ^ Dunn 2003, pp. 779C781.
Jump up ^ Funk, Robert W. (1998). The acts of Jesus: the search for the authentic deeds of Jesus. Harper. pp. 449C495. ISBN 978-0-06-062979-3.
Jump up ^ Ehrman, Bart D., Bart D. (1999). Jesus: Apocalyptic prophet of the new millennium. Oxford University Press. p. 193C197. "... historians do not deny the possibility of miracles or deny that miracles have actually happened in the past. Many historians, for example committed Christians and observant Jews and practicing Muslims, believe that they have in fact happened. When they think or say this, however, the do so not in the capacity of the historian, but in the capacity of the believer."
^ Jump up to: a b Theissen & Merz 1998, p. 310.
Jump up ^ Grudem 1994, pp. 90C91.
^ Jump up to: a b K?stenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, pp. 117C125.
^ Jump up to: a b Ehrman 1999, pp. 22C23.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Thompson, Frank Charles. The Thompson Chain-Reference Bible. Kirk bride Bible Co & Zondervan Bible Publishers. 1983. p. 1563C1564.
^ Jump up to: a b May, Herbert G. and Bruce M. Metzger. The New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha. 1977. "Matthew" p. 1171C1212.
^ Jump up to: a b May, Herbert G. and Bruce M. Metzger. The New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha. 1977. "Luke" p. 1240-1285.
^ Jump up to: a b Cross 2005, John, Gospel of.
^ Jump up to: a b May, Herbert G. and Bruce M. Metzger. The New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha. 1977. "John" p. 1286-1318.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e f Harris 1985, pp. 302C310.
^ Jump up to: a b Rahner 2004, pp. 730C731.
Jump up ^ O'Collins, Gerald (2009). Christology: A Biblical, Historical, and Systematic Study of Jesus. OUP Oxford. pp. 1C3. ISBN 978-0-19-955787-5.
^ Jump up to: a b Wiarda, Timothy (2010). Interpreting Gospel Narratives: Scenes, People, and Theology. B&H Publishing Group. pp. 75C78. ISBN 978-0-8054-4843-6.
^ Jump up to: a b Turner, David L. (2008). Matthew. Baker Academic. p. 613. ISBN 978-0-8010-2684-3.
Jump up ^ Brown, Raymond E. (1978). Mary in the New Testament. Paulist Press. p. 163. ISBN 978-0-8091-2168-7.
Jump up ^ France, R. T. (1985). The Gospel According to Matthew: An Introduction and Commentary. Eerdmans. pp. 71C72.
Jump up ^ Borg, Marcus J.; Crossan, John D. (2009). The First Christmas. HarperCollins. p. 95.
Jump up ^ Mills & Bullard 1998, p. 556.
^ Jump up to: a b c Marsh, Clive; Moyise, Steve (2006). Jesus and the Gospels. Clark International. p. 37. ISBN 978-0-567-04073-2.
Jump up ^ Morris 1992, p. 26.
^ Jump up to: a b c Jeffrey, David L. (1992). A Dictionary of biblical tradition in English literature. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 538C540. ISBN 978-0-85244-224-1.
Jump up ^ Cox & Easley 2007, pp. 30C37.
Jump up ^ Brownrigg, Ronald (2002). Who's Who in the New Testament. Taylor & Francis. pp. 96C100. ISBN 978-0-415-26036-7.
Jump up ^ Cross 2005, Virgin Birth of Christ.
Jump up ^ Harris 1985, pp. 275.
^ Jump up to: a b Talbert, Charles H. (2010). Matthew. Baker Academic. pp. 29C30. ISBN 978-0-8010-3192-2.
^ Jump up to: a b c Harris 1985, pp. 272C285.
Jump up ^ Schnackenburg, Rudolf (2002). The Gospel of Matthew. Wm.B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 9C11. ISBN 978-0-8028-4438-5.
Jump up ^ Perrotta, Louise B. (2000). Saint Joseph: His Life and His Role in the Church Today. Our Sunday Visitor Publishing. pp. 21, 110C112. ISBN 978-0-87973-573-9.
Jump up ^ Aslan, Reza (2013). Zealot: The Life and Times of Jesus of Nazareth. Random House. p. 756.
Jump up ^ Josephus (2012). Antiquities of the Jews. Acheron Press. p. 21247.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e Harris 1985, pp. 270C272.
Jump up ^ Liddell, Henry G.; Scott, Robert (1889). An Intermediate GreekCEnglish Lexicon: The Seventh Edition of Liddell and Scott's GreekCEnglish Lexicon. Clarendon Press. p. 797.
Jump up ^ Dickson 2008, pp. 68C69.
Jump up ^ Evans, Craig A. (2001). "Context, family and formation". In Bockmuehl, Markus N. A. Cambridge companion to Jesus. Cambridge University Press. pp. 14, 21. ISBN 978-0-521-79678-1.
^ Jump up to: a b c Blomberg 2009, pp. 224C229.
Jump up ^ K?stenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, pp. 141C143.
^ Jump up to: a b McGrath 2006, pp. 16C22.
Jump up ^ Dunn, James D.G.; Rogerson, John W. (2003). Eerdmans commentary on the Bible. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 1010. ISBN 978-0-8028-3711-0.
^ Jump up to: a b Zanzig, Thomas (2000). Jesus of history, Christ of faith. Saint Mary's Press. p. 118. ISBN 978-0-88489-530-5.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Lee 2004, pp. 21C30.
^ Jump up to: a b c Harding, Mark; Nobbs, Alanna (2010). The Content and the Setting of the Gospel Tradition. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 281C282. ISBN 978-0-8028-3318-1.
Jump up ^ Sheen, Fulton J. (2008). Life of Christ. Random House. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-385-52699-9.
^ Jump up to: a b c Cross 2005, Jesus Christ.
Jump up ^ Boring & Craddock 2004, p. 292.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e Harris 1985, pp. 285C296.
^ Jump up to: a b Redford 2007, pp. 117C130.
Jump up ^ Vaught, Carl G. (2001). The Sermon on the mount: a theological investigation. Baylor University Press. pp. xiCxiv. ISBN 978-0-918954-76-3.
Jump up ^ Redford 2007, pp. 143C160.
Jump up ^ Nash, Henry S. (1909). "Transfiguration, The". In Jackson, Samuel M. The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Thought: Son of Man-Tremellius V11. Funk & Wagnalls Company. p. 493. ISBN 978-1-4286-3189-2.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Barton, Stephen C. The Cambridge companion to the Gospels. Cambridge University Press. pp. 132C133. ISBN 978-0-521-80766-1.
Jump up ^ Cox & Easley 2007, p. 137.
Jump up ^ Redford 2007, pp. 211C229.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e f Cox & Easley 2007, pp. 155C170.
Jump up ^ Redford 2007, pp. 257C274.
Jump up ^ Brown 1988, pp. 25C27.
Jump up ^ Boring & Craddock 2004, pp. 292C293.
Jump up ^ Patella, Michael F. (2009). "The Gospel According to Luke". In Durken, Daniel. New Collegeville Bible Commentary: New Testament. Liturgical Press. p. 255. ISBN 978-0-8146-3260-4.
Jump up ^ Stassen, Glen H.; Gushee, David P. (2003). Kingdom Ethics: Following Jesus in Contemporary Context. InterVarsity Press. pp. 102C103, 138C140, 197C198, 295C298. ISBN 978-0-8308-2668-1.
^ Jump up to: a b Osborn, Eric F. (1993). The emergence of Christian theology. Cambridge University Press. p. 98. ISBN 978-0-521-43078-4.
Jump up ^ K?stenberger, Andreas J. (1998). The missions of Jesus and the disciples according to the Fourth Gospel. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 108C109. ISBN 978-0-8028-4255-8.
Jump up ^ Pentecost, J. Dwight (1998). The parables of Jesus: lessons in life from the Master Teacher. Kregel Publications. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-8254-9715-5.
Jump up ^ Howick, E. Keith (2003). The Sermons of Jesus the Messiah. WindRiver Publishing. pp. 7C9. ISBN 978-1-886249-02-8.
Jump up ^ Lisco, Friedrich G. (1850). The Parables of Jesus. Daniels and Smith Publishers. pp. 9C11.
Jump up ^ Oxenden, Ashton (1864). The parables of our Lord?. William Macintosh Publishers. p. 6.
Jump up ^ Blomberg, Craig L. (2012). Interpreting the Parables. InterVarsity Press. p. 448. ISBN 978-0-8308-3967-4.
Jump up ^ Boucher, Madeleine I. "The Parables". BBC. Retrieved June 3, 2013.
Jump up ^ Green, McKnight & Marshall 1992, p. 299.
Jump up ^ Twelftree 1999, p. 350.
Jump up ^ Green, McKnight & Marshall 1992, p. 300.
Jump up ^ Sanders, Ed P.; Pelikan, Jaroslav J. "Jesus Christ". Encyclop?dia Britannica. Retrieved June 10, 2015.
Jump up ^ Hindson, Edward E.; Mitchell, Daniel R. (2010). Zondervan King James Version Commentary: New Testament. Zondervan. p. 100. ISBN 978-0-310-25150-7.
^ Jump up to: a b Achtemeier, Paul J.; Green, Joel B.; Thompson, Marianne M. (2001). Introducing the New Testament: Its Literature and Theology. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 198. ISBN 978-0-8028-3717-2.
Jump up ^ Ehrman, Bart D. (2009). Jesus, Interrupted: Revealing the Hidden Contradictions in the Bible (And Why We Don't Know About Them). HarperCollins. p. 84. ISBN 978-0-06-186328-8.
Jump up ^ Twelftree 1999, p. 236.
Jump up ^ van der Loos, Hendrik (1965). The Miracles Of Jesus. Brill. p. 197.
Jump up ^ Pentecost, J. Dwight (1981). The words and works of Jesus Christ. Zondervan. p. 212. ISBN 978-0-310-30940-6.
Jump up ^ Twelftree 1999, p. 95.
Jump up ^ Donahue & Harrington 2002, p. 182.
Jump up ^ Lockyer, Herbert (1988). All the Miracles of the Bible. Zondervan. p. 235. ISBN 978-0-310-28101-6.
Jump up ^ Kingsbury, Jack D. (1983). The Christology of Mark's Gospel. Fortress Press. pp. 91C95. ISBN 978-1-4514-1007-5.
Jump up ^ Karris, Robert J. (1992). The Collegeville Bible Commentary: New Testament. Liturgical Press. pp. 885C886. ISBN 978-0-8146-2211-7.
Jump up ^ Kingsbury, Jack D.; Powell, Mark A.; Bauer, David R. (1999). Who do you say that I am? Essays on Christology. Westminster John Knox Press. p. xvi. ISBN 978-0-664-25752-1.
Jump up ^ Donahue & Harrington 2002, p. 336.
Jump up ^ Yieh, John Y. H. (2004). One teacher: Jesus' teaching role in Matthew's gospel. Walter de Gruyter. pp. 240C241. ISBN 978-3-11-018151-7.
Jump up ^ Pannenberg 1968, pp. 53C54.
Jump up ^ Lee 2004, pp. 72C76.
Jump up ^ May, Herbert G. and Bruce M. Metzger. The New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha. 1977. p. 1481.
^ Jump up to: a b Boring & Craddock 2004, pp. 256C258.
Jump up ^ Majernk, Ponessa & Manhardt 2005, pp. 133C134.
^ Jump up to: a b Evans 2003, pp. 381C395.
Jump up ^ Lockyer, Herbert (1988). All the Apostles of the Bible. Zondervan. pp. 106C111. ISBN 978-0-310-28011-8.
Jump up ^ Hayes, Doremus A. (2009). The Synoptic Gospels and the Book of Acts. HardPress. p. 88. ISBN 978-1-313-53490-1.
Jump up ^ Funk & Hoover 1993, pp. 401C470.
Jump up ^ Cox & Easley 2007, pp. 180C191.
^ Jump up to: a b Cox & Easley 2007, p. 182.
Jump up ^ Cross 2005, Eucharist.
Jump up ^ Wikisource-logo.svg Pohle, Joseph (1913). "The Blessed Eucharist as a Sacrament". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Jump up ^ Freedman 2000, p. 792.
^ Jump up to: a b Perkins, Pheme (2000). Peter: apostle for the whole church. Fortress Press. p. 85. ISBN 978-1-4514-1598-8.
Jump up ^ Lange, Johann P. (1865). The Gospel according to Matthew, Volume 1. Charles Scribner Co. p. 499.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e f Walvoord & Zuck 1983, pp. 83C85.
Jump up ^ O'Day, Gail R.; Hylen, Susan (2006). John. Westminster John Knox Press. pp. 142C168. ISBN 978-0-664-25260-1.
Jump up ^ Ridderbos, Herman (1997). The Gospel according to John. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 546C576. ISBN 978-0-8028-0453-2.
Jump up ^ Cross 2005, Jesus.
Jump up ^ Brown 1997, p. 146.
Jump up ^ Bromiley, Geoffrey W. (1988). International Standard Bible Encyclopedia: ECJ. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 1050C1052. ISBN 978-0-8028-3782-0.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Evans 2003, pp. 487C500.
^ Jump up to: a b c Blomberg 2009, pp. 396C400.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e Holman Concise Bible Dictionary. B&H Publishing Group. 2011. pp. 608C609. ISBN 978-0-8054-9548-5.
Jump up ^ Evans 2003, p. 495.
Jump up ^ Blomberg 2009, pp. 396C398.
Jump up ^ O'Toole, Robert F. (2004). Luke's presentation of Jesus: a christology. Editrice Pontificio Istituto Biblico. p. 166. ISBN 978-88-7653-625-0.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Funk, Robert W. and the Jesus Seminar. The acts of Jesus: the search for the authentic deeds of Jesus. HarperSanFrancisco. 1998. "Mark," p. 51-161
Jump up ^ Elowsky, Joel C. (2007). John 11-21. Volume 4, Part 2 of Ancient Christian Commentary on Scripture. InterVarsity Press. p. 303. ISBN 9780830810994.
Jump up ^ Binz, Stephen J. (2004). The Names of Jesus. Twenty-Third Publications. pp. 81C82. ISBN 978-1-58595-315-8.
Jump up ^ Ironside, H. A. (2006). John. Kregel Academic. p. 454. ISBN 978-0-8254-9619-6.
^ Jump up to: a b Niswonger 1992, p. 172.
Jump up ^ Majernk, Ponessa & Manhardt 2005, p. 181.
^ Jump up to: a b Carter 2003, pp. 120C121.
Jump up ^ Blomberg 2009, pp. 400C401.
Jump up ^ Brown 1988, p. 93.
Jump up ^ Senior, Donald (1985). The Passion of Jesus in the Gospel of Matthew. Liturgical Press. p. 124. ISBN 978-0-8146-5460-6.
Jump up ^ Blomberg 2009, p. 402.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e f g Evans 2003, pp. 509C520.
^ Jump up to: a b K?stenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, pp. 211C214.
Jump up ^ Doninger 1999, p. 271.
Jump up ^ Doninger 1999, p. 271.
Jump up ^ K?stenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, pp. 213C214.
Jump up ^ Morris 1992, p. 727.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Harris 1985, pp. 308C309.
Jump up ^ Harris 1985, pp. 297C301.
Jump up ^ Cox & Easley 2007, pp. 216C226.
Jump up ^ Frederick F., Bruce (1990). The Acts of the Apostles. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 210. ISBN 978-0-8028-0966-7.
^ Jump up to: a b Johnson, Luke T.; Harrington, Daniel J. (1992). The Acts of the Apostles. Liturgical Press. pp. 164C167. ISBN 978-0-8146-5807-9.
Jump up ^ Wikisource-logo.svg Van den Biesen, Christian (1913). "Apocalypse". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Jump up ^ Levine 2006, p. 5.
Jump up ^ Witherington 1997, pp. 9C13.
Jump up ^ Powell 1998, pp. 19C23.
Jump up ^ Amy-Jill Levine in The Historical Jesus in Context edited by Amy-Jill Levine et al. Princeton University Press ISBN 978-0-691-00992-6 page 4: "There is a consensus of sorts on a basic outline of Jesus' life. Most scholars agree that Jesus was baptized by John, debated with fellow Jews on how best to live according to God's will, engaged in healings and exorcisms, taught in parables, gathered male and female followers in Galilee, went to Jerusalem, and was crucified by Roman soldiers during the governorship of Pontius Pilate"
Jump up ^ The Quest for the Plausible Jesus: The Question of Criteria by Gerd Theissen and Dagmar Winter (Aug 30, 2002) ISBN 0664225373 page 5
Jump up ^ Jesus Research: An International Perspective (Princeton-Prague Symposia Series on the Historical Jesus) by James H. Charlesworth and Petr Pokorny (Sep 15, 2009) ISBN 0802863531 pages 1-2
Jump up ^ Keener, Craig S. (2012). The Historical Jesus of the Gospels. William B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 163. ISBN 978-0-8028-6292-1.
^ Jump up to: a b Chilton & Evans 1998, p. 27.
Jump up ^ Evans 2012, pp. 4C5.
Jump up ^ Borg, Marcus J. (1994). Jesus in Contemporary Scholarship. Continuum. pp. 4C6. ISBN 978-1-56338-094-5.
Jump up ^ Theissen & Winter 2002, pp. 142C143.
Jump up ^ Anderson, Paul N.; Just, Felix; Thatcher, Tom (2007). John, Jesus, and History, Volume 1: Critical Appraisals of Critical Views. Society of Biblical Lit. p. 131. ISBN 978-1-58983-293-0.
Jump up ^ Meier 2006, p. 124.
Jump up ^ Sanders, E.P. "Jesus Christ." Encyclopedia Britannica Online. Retrieved September 16, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Blomberg 2009, pp. 431C436.
^ Jump up to: a b c Harris 1985, p. 263.
Jump up ^ Rausch 2003, pp. 36C37.
Jump up ^ Anderson, Paul N.; Just, Felix; Thatcher, Tom (2007). John, Jesus, and History, Volume 2. Society of Biblical Lit. p. 291. ISBN 978-1-58983-293-0.
Jump up ^ Anderson, Paul N.; Just, Felix; Thatcher, Tom (2007). John, Jesus, and History, Volume 2. Society of Biblical Lit. p. 292. ISBN 978-1-58983-293-0.
Jump up ^ Funk & Hoover 1993, pp. 471C532.
Jump up ^ Tuckett, Christopher (2001). "Sources and methods". In Bockmuehl, Markus N. A. Cambridge Companion to Jesus. Cambridge University Press. pp. 123C4. ISBN 978-0-521-79678-1. All this does at least render highly implausible any far-fetched theories that even Jesus very existence was a Christian invention. The fact that Jesus existed, that he was crucified under Pontius Pilate (for whatever reason) and that he had a band of followers who continued to support his cause, seems to be part of the bedrock of historical tradition. If nothing else, the non-Christian evidence can provide us with certainty on that score.
Jump up ^ Van Voorst 2000, pp. 39C53.
Jump up ^ Van Voorst 2000, p. 83.
Jump up ^ Maier, Paul L. (1995). Josephus, the essential works: a condensation of Jewish antiquities and The Jewish war. p. 285. ISBN 978-0-8254-3260-6.
Jump up ^ Evans, Craig A. (2001). Jesus and His Contemporaries: Comparative Studies. Brill. p. 42. ISBN 978-0-391-04118-9.
Jump up ^ Reed 2002, p. 18.
^ Jump up to: a b Gowler, David B. (2007). What are they saying about the historical Jesus?. Paulist Press. p. 102. ISBN 978-0-8091-4445-7.
Jump up ^ Charlesworth, James H., ed. (2006). "Jesus and Archaeology". Jesus and archaeology. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 127. ISBN 978-0-8028-4880-2.
Jump up ^ Maier 1989, pp. 115C118.
^ Jump up to: a b Niswonger 1992, pp. 121C122.
Jump up ^ K?stenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, pp. 137C138.
Jump up ^ Niswonger 1992, pp. 122C124.
^ Jump up to: a b Vermes, Gza (2010). The Nativity: History and Legend. Random House Digital. pp. 81C82. ISBN 978-0-307-49918-9.
Jump up ^ Dunn 2003, p. 324.
^ Jump up to: a b K?stenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, p. 140.
^ Jump up to: a b Freedman 2000, p. 249.
Jump up ^ Maier 1989, pp. 120C121.
Jump up ^ Maier 1989, p. 123.
Jump up ^ Evans, Craig (2006). "Josephus on John the Baptist". In Levine, Amy-Jill; Allison, Dale C.; Crossan, John D. The Historical Jesus in Context. Princeton University Press. pp. 55C58. ISBN 978-0-691-00992-6.
Jump up ^ Gillman, Florence M. (2003). Herodias: at home in that fox's den. Liturgical Press. pp. 25C30. ISBN 978-0-8146-5108-7.
Jump up ^ K?stenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, p. 398.
Jump up ^ Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 81C83.
Jump up ^ Green, Joel B. (1997). The gospel of Luke: New International Commentary on the New Testament Series. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 168. ISBN 978-0-8028-2315-1.
Jump up ^ Carter 2003, pp. 44C45.
Jump up ^ K?stenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, p. 398C400.
Jump up ^ Barnett, Paul (2002). Jesus & the Rise of Early Christianity: A History of New Testament Times. InterVarsity Press. p. 21. ISBN 978-0-8308-2699-5.
Jump up ^ Pratt, J. P. (1991). "Newton's Date for the Crucifixion". Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society 32: 301C304. Bibcode:1991QJRAS..32..301P.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e Ehrman 1993, p. 98C99.
Jump up ^ Sanders, E.P. Jesus Christ. Encyclopedia Britannica Online. Retrieved September 20, 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Vermes, Geza (1981). Jesus the Jew: A Historian's Reading of the Gospels. Philadelphia: First Fortress. p. 283. ISBN 0-8006-1443-7.
Jump up ^ Sanders, E. P. (1995). The Historical Figure of Jesus. London: Penguin. p. 333. ISBN 978-0-140-14499-4.
Jump up ^ Funk, Robert W. and the Jesus Seminar. The acts of Jesus: the search for the authentic deeds of Jesus. HarperSanFrancisco. 1998. p. 85. Funk calls this usage "striking".
Jump up ^ Funk, Robert W. and the Jesus Seminar. The acts of Jesus: the search for the authentic deeds of Jesus. HarperSanFrancisco. 1998. p. 85, 499. Specific scholars are not named in either reference.
Jump up ^ Funk, Robert W. and the Jesus Seminar. The acts of Jesus: the search for the authentic deeds of Jesus. HarperSanFrancisco. 1998. p. 85. "Mary was undoubtedly the name of Jesus' mother."
^ Jump up to: a b c Theissen & Merz 1998, p. 194.
Jump up ^ "James, St." Cross, F. L., ed. The Oxford dictionary of the Christian church. New York: Oxford University Press. 2005
Jump up ^ Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 113C115.
Jump up ^ Coogan, Michael. God and Sex: What the Bible Really Says 2010.. p. 38
Jump up ^ Bromiley, Geoffrey (1995) International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, Eerdmans Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8028-3784-4, p. 991.
Jump up ^ Craig S. Keener, The Gospel of Matthew (Eerdmans 2009 ISBN 978-0-8028-6498-7), p. 83
Jump up ^ Donald A. Hagner, Matthew 1-13 (Paternoster Press 1993 ISBN 978-0-8499-0232-1), pp. 14-15, cited in the preceding
Jump up ^ Millard Erickson, Christian Theology (Baker Academic 1998 ISBN 978-0-8010-2182-4), p. 761
Jump up ^ Fritz Allhoff, Scott C. Lowe, Christmas C Philosophy for Everyone: Better Than a Lump of Coal (Wiley-Blackwell 2010 ISBN 978-1-4443-3090-8), p. 28
Jump up ^ Frederick Dale Bruner, Matthew: The Christbook (Eerdmans 2004 ISBN 9780802811189), p. 41
^ Jump up to: a b c Sanders 1993, pp. 80C91.
Jump up ^ Theissen & Merz 1998, p. 196.
Jump up ^ Funk, Robert W. and the Jesus Seminar. The acts of Jesus: the search for the authentic deeds of Jesus. HarperSanFrancisco. 1998. "Birth & Infancy Stories" p. 497-526.
Jump up ^ Powell 1998, p. 47.
Jump up ^ Murphy, Catherine (2003). John the Baptist: Prophet of Purity for a New Age. Liturgical Press. pp. 29C30. ISBN 978-0-8146-5933-5.
^ Jump up to: a b c Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 144-147.
^ Jump up to: a b Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 235.
Jump up ^ Borg, Marcus J. (2006). "The Spirit-Filled Experience of Jesus". In Dunn, James D.G.; McKnight, Scot. The Historical Jesus in Recent Research. Eisenbrauns. p. 303. ISBN 978-1-57506-100-9.
^ Jump up to: a b Sanders 1993, pp. 205C223.
Jump up ^ Ehrman 1999, pp. 167C170.
^ Jump up to: a b Ehrman 1999, pp. 164C167.
Jump up ^ Ehrman 1999, pp. 171C176.
Jump up ^ Funk, Robert W., Roy W. Hoover, and the Jesus Seminar. The five gospels. HarperSanFrancisco. 1993. p. 294
Jump up ^ Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 298.
Jump up ^ "Jesus of Nazareth." Encyclopedia of World Biography. 2004. Retrieved 29 Dec 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b Sanders 1993, p. 10.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e Ehrman 1999, p. 186C187.
Jump up ^ Sanders 1993, p. 120.
^ Jump up to: a b c Sanders 1993, p. 123C124.
Jump up ^ Cross 2005, Messiah.
^ Jump up to: a b Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 533-540.
Jump up ^ Ehrman, Bart (December 1, 2015). "Judas and the Messianic Secret". The Bart Ehrman Blog.
Jump up ^ Ehrman, Bart (December 1, 2015). "Jesus' Claim to be the Messiah". The Bart Ehrman Blog.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Sanders 1993, p. 11.
Jump up ^ Meier 2006, pp. 126C128.
Jump up ^ Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 465C466.
Jump up ^ Sanders 1993, pp. 269-273.
Jump up ^ Sanders 1993.
Jump up ^ Sanders 1993, pp. 276-281.
Jump up ^ Theissen & Winter 2002, pp. 4C5.
Jump up ^ Theissen & Winter 2002, p. 5.
Jump up ^ Cross 2005, Historical Jesus, Quest of the.
Jump up ^ Mitchell, Margaret M.; Young, Frances M. (2006). The Cambridge History of Christianity 1. Cambridge University Press. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-521-81239-9.
Jump up ^ K?stenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, pp. 124C125.
Jump up ^ Brown, Colin (2011). "Why Study the Historical Jesus?". In Holmen, Tom; Porter, Stanley E. Handbook for the Study of the Historical Jesus. Brill. p. 1416. ISBN 978-90-04-16372-0.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Houlden 2006, pp. 63C99.
^ Jump up to: a b Erricker, Clive (1987). Teaching Christianity: a world religions approach. James Clarke & Co. p. 44. ISBN 978-0-7188-2634-5.
Jump up ^ Green, McKnight & Marshall 1992, p. 442.
Jump up ^ Barr, James (1970). "Which language did Jesus speak". Bulletin of the John Rylands University Library of Manchester 53 (1): 9C29.
Jump up ^ Porter, Stanley E. (1997). Handbook to exegesis of the New Testament. Brill. pp. 110C112. ISBN 978-90-04-09921-0.
Jump up ^ Dunn 2003, pp. 313C315.
Jump up ^ Ehrman 1999, p. 96.
Jump up ^ Stoutzenberger, Joseph (2000). Celebrating sacraments. St Mary's Press. p. 286.
Jump up ^ Elliott, John (2007). "Jesus the Israelite Was Neither a 'Jew' nor a 'Christian': On Correcting Misleading Nomenclature". Journal for the Study of the Historical Jesus 5 (119): 119. doi:10.1177/1476869007079741.
Jump up ^ Garroway, Rabbi Joshua (2011). "Ioudaios". In Amy-Jill Levine, Marc Z. Brettler. The Jewish Annotated New Testament. Oxford University Press. pp. 524C526. ISBN 9780195297706.
Jump up ^ Miller, David M. (2010). "The Meaning of Ioudaios and its Relationship to Other Group Labels in Ancient Judaism'" (PDF). Currents in Biblical Research 9 (1): 98C126.
Jump up ^ Mason, Steve (2007). "Jews, Judaeans, Judaizing, Judaism: Problems of Categorization in Ancient History" (PDF). Journal for the Study of Judaism 38: 457C512. doi:10.1163/156851507X193108.
Jump up ^ Levine 2006, p. 10.
Jump up ^ Jensen, Robin M. (2010). "Jesus in Christian art". In Burkett, Delbert. The Blackwell Companion to Jesus. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 477C502. ISBN 978-1-4443-5175-0.
^ Jump up to: a b Perkinson, Stephen (2009). The likeness of the king: a prehistory of portraiture in late medieval France. University of Chicago Press. p. 30. ISBN 978-0-226-65879-7.
Jump up ^ Kidd, Colin (2006). The forging of races: race and scripture in the Protestant Atlantic world. Cambridge University Press. pp. 48C51. ISBN 978-1-139-45753-8.
Jump up ^ Gibson, David (February 21, 2004). "What Did Jesus Really Look Like?". New York Times.
Jump up ^ Bart Ehrman, Did Jesus Exist? Harper Collins, 2012, p. 12, ""In simpler terms, the historical Jesus did not exist . Or if he did, he had virtually nothing to do with the founding of Christianity." further quoting as authoritative the fuller definition provided by Earl Doherty in Jesus: Neither God Nor Man. Age of Reason, 2009, pp. vii-viii: it is "the theory that no historical Jesus worthy of the name existed, that Christianity began with a belief in a spiritual, mythical figure, that the Gospels are essentially allegory and fiction, and that no single identifiable person lay at the root of the Galilean preaching tradition."
^ Jump up to: a b c Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 90.
Jump up ^ James D. G. Dunn "Paul's understanding of the death of Jesus" in Sacrifice and Redemption edited by S. W. Sykes (December 3, 2007) Cambridge University Press ISBN 052104460X pages 35-36
Jump up ^ Jesus Now and Then by Richard A. Burridge and Graham Gould (April 1, 2004) ISBN 0802809774 page 34
Jump up ^ Jesus by Michael Grant 2004 ISBN 1898799881 page 200
Jump up ^ The Gospels and Jesus by Graham Stanton, 1989 ISBN 0192132415 Oxford University Press, page 145
Jump up ^ Robert E. Van Voorst Jesus Outside the New Testament: An Introduction to the Ancient Evidence Eerdmans Publishing, 2000. ISBN 0-8028-4368-9 page 16
Jump up ^ Did Jesus Exist?:The Historical Argument for Jesus of Nazareth. HarperCollins, USA. 2012. ISBN 978-0-06-220460-8.
Jump up ^ B. Ehrman, 2011 Forged : writing in the name of God ISBN 978-0-06-207863-6. page 285
Jump up ^ Watson, Francis (2001). "The quest for the real Jesus". In Bockmuehl, Markus N. A. Cambridge companion to Jesus. Cambridge University Press. pp. 156C157. ISBN 978-0-521-79678-1.
Jump up ^ Evans, C. Stephen (1996). The historical Christ and the Jesus of faith. Oxford University Press. p. v. ISBN 978-0-19-152042-6.
Jump up ^ Delbert, Burkett (2010). The Blackwell Companion to Jesus. John Wiley & Sons. p. 1. ISBN 978-1-4443-5175-0.
Jump up ^ Jackson, Gregory L. (1993). Catholic, Lutheran, Protestant: a doctrinal comparison. Christian News. pp. 11C17. ISBN 978-0-615-16635-3.
Jump up ^ McGuckin, John A. (2010). The Orthodox Church: An Introduction to Its History, Doctrine. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 6C7. ISBN 978-1-4443-9383-5.
Jump up ^ Leith, John H. (1993). Basic Christian doctrine. Westminster John Knox Press. pp. 1C2. ISBN 978-0-664-25192-5.
Jump up ^ Schreiner, Thomas R. (2008). New Testament Theology: Magnifying God in Christ. Baker Academic. pp. 23C37. ISBN 978-0-8010-2680-5.
Jump up ^ Cross 2005, Great Schism.
Jump up ^ "The Letter of Paul to the Corinthians". Encyclop?dia Britannica. Retrieved June 26, 2013.
Jump up ^ Cullmann, Oscar (1959). The Christology of the New Testament. Westminster John Knox Press. p. 79. ISBN 978-0-664-24351-7.
Jump up ^ Deme, Dniel (2004). The Christology of Anselm of Canterbury. Ashgate Publishing. pp. 199C200. ISBN 978-0-7546-3779-0.
Jump up ^ Pannenberg, Wolfhart (2004). Systematic Theology 2. Continuum. pp. 297C303. ISBN 978-0-567-08466-8.
^ Jump up to: a b Cross 2005, Antitrinitarianism.
Jump up ^ Friedmann, Robert. "Antitrinitarianism". Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
Jump up ^ Wikisource-logo.svg Joyce, George H. (1913). "Blessed Trinity". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Jump up ^ "Mormonism 101: What is Mormonism", MormonNewsroom.org (LDS Church), retrieved October 21, 2014
Jump up ^ Hunter, Sylvester (2010). Outlines of dogmatic theology 2. Nabu Press. p. 443. ISBN 978-1-177-95809-7.
^ Jump up to: a b Houlden 2006, p. 426.
Jump up ^ Virgin Birth of Christ. Cross, F. L., ed. The Oxford dictionary of the Christian church. New York: Oxford University Press. 2005
Jump up ^ Kessler, Ed. "Jesus the Jew". BBC. Retrieved June 18, 2013.
Jump up ^ Norman, Asher (2007). Twenty-six reasons why Jews don't believe in Jesus. Feldheim Publishers. pp. 59C70. ISBN 978-0-9771937-0-7.
Jump up ^ Simmons, Shraga (March 6, 2004). "Why Jews Do not Believe in Jesus". Aish.com.
Jump up ^ "MALACHI, BOOK OF". Jewish Encyclopedia. Retrieved July 3, 2013.
Jump up ^ Heschel, Susannah. "Jesus in Modern Jewish Thought". in Amy-Jill Levine, Marc Z. Brettler (editors), The Jewish Annotated New Testament, p. 584 (New Revised Standard Version, Oxford University Press, 2011). ISBN 978-0-19-529770-6
Jump up ^ Flusser, David. (1972). "Jesus" In Encyclopaedia Judaica. Jerusalem: Macmillan. 10 p.13.
Jump up ^ "TALMUD". Jewish Encyclopedia. Retrieved July 3, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Jesus". Jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved 2016-05-20.
Jump up ^ Kessler, Edward; Wenborn, Neil (2005). A Dictionary of Jewish-Christian Relations. Cambridge University Press. p. 416. ISBN 978-1-139-44750-8.
Jump up ^ Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 74C75.
Jump up ^ Jeffrey, Grant R. (2009). Heaven: The Mystery of Angels. Random House Digital. p. 108. ISBN 978-0-307-50940-6.
Jump up ^ Esposito, John L. (2003). The Oxford Dictionary of Islam. Oxford University Press. p. 158. ISBN 978-0-19-975726-8.
Jump up ^ Paget, James C. (2001). "Quests for the historical Jesus". In Bockmuehl, Markus N. A. Cambridge companion to Jesus. Cambridge University Press. p. 183. ISBN 978-0-521-79678-1.
Jump up ^ Ashraf, Irshad (Director) (August 19, 2007). The Muslim Jesus (Television production). ITV Productions.
Jump up ^ "Jesus, Son of Mary". Oxford Islamic Studies Online. Retrieved July 3, 2013.
Jump up ^ Aboul-Enein, Youssef H. (2010). Militant Islamist Ideology: Understanding the Global Threat. Naval Institute Press. p. 20. ISBN 978-1-61251-015-6.
^ Jump up to: a b Fasching, Darrell J.; deChant, Dell (2001). Comparative Religious Ethics: A Narrative Approach. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 241, 274C275. ISBN 978-0-631-20125-0.
Jump up ^ George, Timothy (2002). Is the Father of Jesus the God of Muhammad?: Understanding the Differences Between Christianity and Islam. Zondervan. pp. 150C151. ISBN 978-0-310-24748-7.
Jump up ^ Shedinger, Robert F. (2009). Was Jesus a Muslim?: Questioning Categories in the Study of Religion. Fortress Press. p. ix. ISBN 978-1-4514-1727-2.
^ Jump up to: a b c Burns, Robert A. (2011). Christianity, Islam, and the West. University Press of America. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-7618-5560-6.
^ Jump up to: a b Peters, F. E. (2003). Islam: A Guide for Jews and Christians. Princeton University Press. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-691-11553-5.
Jump up ^ Cooper, Anne; Maxwell, Elsie A. (2003). Ishmael My Brother: A Christian Introduction To Islam. Monarch Books. p. 59. ISBN 978-0-8254-6223-8.
Jump up ^ "The Quranic Arabic Corpus - Translation". Corpus.quran.com. Retrieved 2016-05-20.
Jump up ^ Quran 4:157
Jump up ^ Khalidi, Tarif (2001). The Muslim Jesus: Sayings and Stories in Islamic Literature. Harvard University Press. p. 12. ISBN 9780674004771.
Jump up ^ Religions of the World: A Comprehensive Encyclopedia of Beliefs and Practices. ABC-CLIO. p. 55. ISBN 978-1-59884-203-6.
^ Jump up to: a b c Stockman, Robert (1992). "Jesus Christ in the Bah' Writings". Bah' Studies Review 2 (1).
^ Jump up to: a b c Cole, Juan (1982). "The Concept of Manifestation in the Bah' Writings". Bah' Studies 9: 1C38.
^ Jump up to: a b Smith, Peter (2000). "peace". A concise encyclopedia of the Bah' Faith. Oneworld Publications. p. 214. ISBN 978-1-85168-184-6.
Jump up ^ Smith, Peter (2008). An Introduction to the Baha'i Faith. Cambridge University Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-521-86251-6.
Jump up ^ Lepard, Brian D. (2008). In the Glory of the Father: The Bahai Faith and Christianity. Bahai Publishing. p. 118. ISBN 978-1-931847-34-6.
^ Jump up to: a b Cole, Juan R. I. (1997). "Behold the Man: Baha'u'llah on the Life of Jesus". Journal of the American Academy of Religion 65 (1): 51, 56, 60.
Jump up ^ McManners, John (2001). The Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity. Oxford University Press. p. 27. ISBN 978-0-19-285439-1.
Jump up ^ Ehrman, Bart D. (2003). Lost Christianities: The Battles For Scripture And The Faiths We Never Knew. Oxford University Press. pp. 124C125. ISBN 978-0-19-518249-1.
Jump up ^ Bevan, A. A. (1930). Hastings, James, ed. Manichaeism. Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics 8 (Kessinger Publishing). ISBN 978-0-7661-3666-3.
Jump up ^ Brown, Peter R. L. (2000). Augustine of Hippo: A Biography. University of California Press. p. 43. ISBN 978-0-520-22757-6.
Jump up ^ Rishi Das, Shaunaka (March 24, 2009). "Jesus in Hinduism". BBC.
Jump up ^ Lal Goel, Madan. "RELIGIOUS TOLERANCE AND HINDUISM" (PDF). University of West Florida. Retrieved June 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ Yogananda, Paramahansa (2008). Autobiography of a Yogi. Diamond Pocket Books. ISBN 978-81-902562-0-9.
Jump up ^ Beverley, James A. (June 11, 2011). "Hollywood's Idol". Christianity Today.
Jump up ^ Janet 2012, p. 3.
Jump up ^ Janet 2012, p. 9.
^ Jump up to: a b Hutson, Steven (2006). What They Never Taught You in Sunday School: A Fresh Look at Following Jesus. City Boy Enterprises. p. 57. ISBN 978-1-59886-300-0.
Jump up ^ Pike, Sarah M. (2004). New Age and neopagan religions in America. Columbia University Press. p. 56. ISBN 978-0-231-12402-7.
Jump up ^ Bailey, Alice; Khul, Djwhal (2005). A Treatise on Cosmic Fire. Lucis Publishing Company. pp. 678, 1150, 1193. ISBN 978-0-85330-117-2.
Jump up ^ "What Is Scientology's View of Moses, Jesus, Muhammad, The Buddha and Other Religious Figures of the Past?". Church of Scientology International. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
Jump up ^ Hallowell, Billy (October 25, 2011). "Richard Dawkins: 'Jesus Would Have Been an Atheist if He Had Known What We Know Today'". TheBlaze.
Jump up ^ Richard Dawkins. "The God Delusion". Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 284. Retrieved December 13, 2014.
Jump up ^ Chadwick, Henry, ed. (1980). Contra Celsum. Cambridge University Press. p. xxviii. ISBN 978-0-521-29576-5.
Jump up ^ Stevenson, J. (1987). Frend, W. H. C., ed. A New Eusebius: Documents illustrating the history of the Church to AD 337. SPCK. p. 257. ISBN 978-0-281-04268-5.
Jump up ^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (2010). Twilight of the Idols, Morality as Anti-nature. Digireads.com Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4209-3717-6.
Jump up ^ Russell, Bertrand (2004). Why I am Not a Christian: And Other Essays on Religion and Related Subjects. Routledge Classics. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-671-20323-8.
^ Jump up to: a b Russell on Religion: Selections from the Writings of Bertrand Russell. Routledge. 1999. p. 86.
Jump up ^ Gutmann, Joseph (1992). "Early Christian and Jewish Art". In Attridge, Harold W.; Hata, Gohei. Eusebius, Christianity, and Judaism. Wayne State University Press. pp. 283C284. ISBN 0814323618.
Jump up ^ Benedetto, Robert (2006). The New Westminster Dictionary of Church History. Westminster John Knox Press. pp. 51C53. ISBN 978-0-664-22416-5.
Jump up ^ Schaff, Phillip (July 1, 2006). History of the Christian Church,8 volumes, 3rd edition. Massachusetts: Hendrickson Publishers. ISBN 9781565631960.
Jump up ^ Philip Schaff commenting on Irenaeus, wrote, 'This censure of images as a Gnostic peculiarity, and as a heathenish corruption, should be noted'. Footnote 300 on Contr. Her. .I.XXV.6. ANF
Jump up ^ Synod of Elvira, 'Pictures are not to be placed in churches, so that they do not become objects of worship and adoration', AD 306, Canon 36
^ Jump up to: a b Cross 2005, Icons.
Jump up ^ Bigham, Steven (1995). The image of God the Father in Orthodox theology and iconography. St Vladimir's Seminary Press. pp. 226C227. ISBN 978-1-879038-15-8.
Jump up ^ Cross 2005, Crucifix.
^ Jump up to: a b c d "Creche." Encyclop?dia Britannica Online. Retrieved March 16, 2015.
Jump up ^ Michalski, Sergiusz (1993). Reformation and the Visual Arts. Routledge. p. 195. ISBN 978-1-134-92102-7.
Jump up ^ Payton, James R. (2007). Light from the Christian East: An Introduction to the Orthodox Tradition. InterVarsity Press. pp. 178C179. ISBN 978-0-8308-2594-3.
Jump up ^ Williams, Rowan (2003). The Dwelling of the Light: Praying with Icons of Christ. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 83. ISBN 978-0-8028-2778-4.
Jump up ^ Wojty?a, Karol J. "General audience 29 October 1997". Vatican Publishing House. Retrieved April 20, 2013.
Jump up ^ Ratzinger, Joseph A. "General audience 6 May 2009". Vatican Publishing House. Retrieved April 20, 2013.
Jump up ^ Doninger 1999, p. 231.
Jump up ^ Casiday, Augustine (2012). The Orthodox Christian World. Routledge. p. 447. ISBN 978-0-415-45516-9.
Jump up ^ Levine 2006, p. 24-25.
^ Jump up to: a b Helmut Koester Introduction to the New Testament, Vol. 1: History, Culture, and Religion of the Hellenistic Age. Berlin: de Gruyter Press, 1995 p 382
Jump up ^ Flavius Josephus, The Jewish War Book VII, section 1.1"
Jump up ^ Margaret M. Mitchell "The Cambridge History of Christianity, Volume 1: Origins to Constantine" Cambridge University Press 2006 p 298
Jump up ^ Dillenberger 1999, p. 5.
Jump up ^ Wikisource-logo.svg Thurston, Herbert (1913). "Holy Nails". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Jump up ^ Delaney, Sarah (May 24, 2010). "Shroud exposition closes with more than 2 million visits". Catholic News Service.
Jump up ^ Wojty?a, Karol J. (May 24, 1998). "Pope John Paul II's address in Turin Cathedral". Vatican Publishing House.
Jump up ^ Squires, Nick (May 3, 2010). "Pope Benedict says Shroud of Turin authentic burial robe of Jesus". Christian Science Monitor.
Jump up ^ Nickell, Joe (2007). Relics of the Christ. University Press of Kentucky. p. 191. ISBN 978-0-8131-3731-5.
Jump up ^ Habermas, Gary R. "Shroud of Turin." The Encyclopedia of Christian Civilization (2011). doi:10.1002/9780470670606.wbecc1257
Jump up ^ Ball, P. (2008). "Material witness: Shrouded in mystery". Nature Materials 7 (5): 349. doi:10.1038/nmat2170. PMID 18432204.
Bibliography
Blomberg, Craig L. (2009). Jesus and the Gospels: An Introduction and Survey. B&H Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-8054-4482-7.
Boring, M. Eugene; Craddock, Fred B. (2004). The people's New Testament commentary. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-22754-8.
Brown, Raymond E. (1988). The Gospel and Epistles of John: A Concise Commentary. Liturgical Press. ISBN 978-0-8146-1283-5.
Brown, Raymond E. (1997). An Introduction to the New Testament. Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-24767-2.
Carter, Warren (2003). Pontius Pilate: portraits of a Roman governor. Liturgical Press. ISBN 978-0-8146-5113-1.
Chilton, Bruce; Evans, Craig A. (1998). Studying the Historical Jesus: Evaluations of the State of Current Research. Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-11142-4.
Cox, Steven L.; Easley, Kendell H (2007). Harmony of the Gospels. B&H Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-8054-9444-0.
Cross, Frank L. (2005). Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church. Oxford University Press.
Crossan, John D.; Watts, Richard G. (1999). Who Is Jesus?: Answers to Your Questions About the Historical Jesus. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-25842-9.
Dickson, John (2008). Jesus: A Short Life. Kregel Publications. ISBN 978-0-8254-7802-4.
Dillenberger, John (1999). Images and Relics : Theological Perceptions and Visual Images in Sixteenth-Century Europe: Theological Perceptions and Visual Images in Sixteenth-Century Europe. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-976146-3.
Donahue, John R.; Harrington, Daniel J. (2002). The Gospel of Mark. Liturgical Press. ISBN 978-0-8146-5804-8.
Doninger, Wendy (1999). Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia of World Religions. Merriam-Webster. ISBN 978-0-87779-044-0.
Dunn, James D.G. (2003). Jesus Remembered. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8028-3931-2.
Eddy, Paul R.; Boyd, Gregory A. (2007). The Jesus legend: a case for the historical reliability of the synoptic Jesus tradition. Baker Academic. ISBN 978-0-8010-3114-4.
Ehrman, Bart (1999). Jesus: Apocalyptic Prophet of the New Millennium. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-983943-8.
Evans, Craig A. (2003). The Bible Knowledge Background Commentary: Matthew-Luke. David C. Cook. ISBN 978-0-7814-3868-1.
Evans, Craig A. (2005). The Bible Knowledge Background Commentary: John's Gospel, Hebrews-Revelation. David C. Cook. ISBN 978-0-7814-4228-2.
Evans, Craig A. (2012). Jesus and His World: The Archaeological Evidence. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-23413-3.
France, R. T. (2007). The Gospel of Matthew. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8028-2501-8.
Freedman, David N. (2000). Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible. Amsterdam University Press. ISBN 978-0-8028-2400-4.
Funk, Robert W.; Hoover, Roy W. (1993). The Five Gospels. Harper.
Green, Joel B.; McKnight, Scot; Marshall, I. Howard (1992). Dictionary of Jesus and the Gospels. InterVarsity Press. p. 442. ISBN 978-0-8308-1777-1.
Grudem, Wayne (1994). Systematic Theology: An Introduction to Biblical Doctrine. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan. ISBN 978-0-310-28670-7.
Harris, Stephen L. (1985). Understanding the Bible. Mayfield.
Houlden, J. Leslie (2006). Jesus: the complete guide. Continuum. ISBN 978-0-8264-8011-8.
K?stenberger, Andreas J.; Kellum, L. Scott; Quarles, Charles L (2009). The Cradle, the Cross, and the Crown: An Introduction to the New Testament. B&H Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-8054-4365-3.
Lee, Dorothy A. (2004). Transfiguration. Continuum. ISBN 978-0-8264-7595-4.
Levine, Amy-Jill (2006). "Introduction". In Levine, Amy-Jill; Allison, Dale C.; Crossan, John D. The Historical Jesus in Context. Princeton Univ Press. ISBN 978-0-691-00992-6.
Licona, Michael R. (2010). The Resurrection of Jesus: A New Historiographical Approach. InterVarsity Press. ISBN 978-0-8308-2719-0.
Maier, Paul L. (1989). "The Date of the Nativity and Chronology of Jesus". In Finegan, Jack; Vardaman, Jerry; Yamauchi, Edwin M. Chronos, kairos, Christos: nativity and chronological studies. Eisenbrauns. ISBN 978-0-931464-50-8.
Majernk, Jn; Ponessa, Joseph; Manhardt, Laurie W. (2005). The Synoptics: Matthew, Mark, Luke. Emmaus Road Publishing. ISBN 978-1-931018-31-9.
McGrath, Alister E. (2006). Christianity: An Introduction. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 4C6. ISBN 978-1-4051-0899-7.
Meier, John P. (2006). "How do we decide what comes from Jesus". In Dunn, James D.G.; McKnight, Scot. The Historical Jesus in Recent Research. Eisenbrauns. ISBN 978-1-57506-100-9.
Mills, Watson E.; Bullard, Roger A. (1998). Mercer dictionary of the Bible. Mercer University Press. ISBN 978-0-86554-373-7.
Morris, Leon (1992). The Gospel according to Matthew. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 978-0-85111-338-8.
Niswonger, Richard L. (1992). New Testament History. Zondervan. ISBN 978-0-310-31201-7.
Pannenberg, Wolfhart (1968). JesusGod and Man. S.C.M. Press. ISBN 978-0-334-00783-8.
Powell, Mark A. (1998). Jesus as a Figure in History: How Modern Historians View the Man from Galilee. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-25703-3.
Rahner, Karl (2004). Encyclopedia of theology: a concise Sacramentum mundi. Continuum. ISBN 978-0-86012-006-3.
Rausch, Thomas P. (2003). Who is Jesus?: an introduction to Christology. Liturgical Press. ISBN 978-0-8146-5078-3.
Redford, Douglas (2007). The Life and Ministry of Jesus: The Gospels. Standard Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7847-1900-8.
Reed, Jonathan L. (2002). Archaeology and the Galilean Jesus: a re-examination of the evidence. Continuum. ISBN 978-1-56338-394-6.
Sanders, Ed P. (1993). The Historical Figure of Jesus. Allen Lane Penguin Press. ISBN 978-0-7139-9059-1.
Stanton, Graham (2002). The Gospels and Jesus. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-00802-0.
Theissen, Gerd; Merz, Annette (1998). The Historical Jesus : a Comprehensive Guide. Fortress Press. ISBN 978-1-4514-0863-8.
Theissen, Gerd; Winter, Dagmar (2002). The Quest for the Plausible Jesus: The Question of Criteria. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-22537-7.
Twelftree, Graham H. (1999). Jesus the miracle worker: a historical & theological study. InterVarsity Press. ISBN 978-0-8308-1596-8.
Van Voorst, Robert E (2000). Jesus Outside the New Testament: An Introduction to the Ancient Evidence. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8028-4368-5.
Vine, William E. (1940). Expository Dictionary of New Testament Words. Fleming H. Revell Company. ISBN 978-0-916441-31-9.
Vermes, Geza (1981). Jesus the Jew: A Historian's Reading of the Gospels. Philadelphia: First Fortress. ISBN 0-8006-1443-7.
Vermes, Geza (2003). The Authentic Gospel of Jesus. London: Penguin. ISBN 014100360X.
Walvoord, John F.; Zuck, Roy B. (1983). The Bible Knowledge Commentary: New Testament. David C. Cook. ISBN 978-0-88207-812-0.
Witherington, Ben (1997). The Jesus Quest: The Third Search for the Jew of Nazareth. InterVarsity Press. ISBN 978-0-8308-1544-9.
External links
Listen to this article (info/dl)
MENU0:00


This audio file was created from a revision of the "Jesus" article dated October 28, 2013, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles
Jesus at DMOZ
Complete Sayings of Jesus Christ in parallel Latin and English.
Works by or about Jesus in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
[hide] v t e
Jesus
Historicity	
Chronology of Jesus Genealogy of Jesus Historical Jesus Quest for the historical Jesus Portraits of the historical Jesus Sources Josephus on Jesus Tacitus mention Mara bar Serapion letter Historicity (Gospels)
Life	
Birth Nativity Mary Joseph Childhood Unknown years Baptism Temptation Apostles selection Great Commission Ministry Sermon on the Mount Plain Parables Miracles Transfiguration Homelessness Prayers Passion arrest Crucifixion Tomb Resurrection Ascension
New Testament	
Gospels Matthew Mark Luke John Gospel harmony Oral gospel traditions Life of Jesus in the New Testament Historical background of the New Testament New Testament places associated with Jesus Names and titles of Jesus in the New Testament
Culture	
Language of Jesus Bibliography Films Race and appearance of Jesus
Christianity	
Christ Christianity Christology Depictions of Jesus art Jesus in Christianity Relics associated with Jesus Scholastic Lutheran Christology Second Coming of Christ Session of Christ
Other views	
Brothers of Jesus Jesuism Jesus in Ahmadiyya Islam Jesus in comparative mythology Christ myth theory Jesus in Islam Jesus in Scientology Judaism's view of Jesus in the Talmud Master Jesus Religious perspectives on Jesus Criticism
[show] 
Links to related articles
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 38323081 LCCN: n79084784 GND: 118557513 SELIBR: 222130 SUDOC: 027325636 MusicBrainz: bde40933-e89b-4f10-8e52-faa040c4cae4 NDL: 00565948 RLS: 000008166 BNE: XX1724284
Categories: Jesus0s BC births30s deaths1st-century executions1st-century rabbisAngelic visionariesApocalypticistsCarpentersChild refugeesCreator godsDeified peopleExorcistsFounders of religionsGod in ChristianityJudean peopleLife-death-rebirth godsMessianismPeople executed by crucifixionPeople executed by the Roman EmpirePeople considered avatars by their followersPeople from BethlehemPeople from NazarethProphets in ChristianityProphets of IslamRabbis of the Land of IsraelRoman-era JewsPublicly executed peopleSavior godsSelf-declared messiahsJewish Messiah claimants
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikisource
Languages
Afrikaans
Akan
Alemannisch
????
?nglisc
??
???????
Aragons
?????
Arm?neashti
Asturianu
Ava?e'?
Aymar aru
Az?rbaycanca
Bamanankan
?????
Bahasa Banjar
Ban-lam-g
Basa Banyumasan
?

 (?)?
Bikol Central
Bislama

Boarisch
???????
Bosanski
Brezhoneg

Catal
?
Cebuano
?e?tina
Chavacano de Zamboanga
Chi-Chewa
ChiTumbuka
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deitsch
Deutsch
??????????
Din bizaad
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
?
Emilin e rumagnl

Espa?ol
Esperanto
Estreme?u
Euskara
E?egbe
?????
Fiji Hindi
F?royskt
Fran?ais
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gidhlig
Galego
MZ
???????
????????????
?????? ?????? / G?ychi Konknni
Z/Hak-ka-ng?
???
Hausa
???????
??????
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Igbo
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
??????/inuktitut
I?upiak

IsiXhosa
slenska
Italiano
?????
Basa Jawa
Kalaallisut
?????
Kapampangan
???????
??
Kernowek
Kinyarwanda
Kirundi
Kiswahili

Kongo
Kreyl ayisyen
Kurd?

Ladino


???
???? ??????
Latga?u
Latina
Latvie?u
L?tzebuergesch
Lietuvi?
Ligure
Limburgs
Lingla
La .lojban.
Luganda
Lumbaart
Magyar

Malagasy
??????
Malti
Mori
?????
?????????
????
????????
Bahasa Melayu
Baso Minangkabau
Mng-d??ng-ng??
Mirands

??????????
Nhuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Na Vosa Vakaviti
Nederlands
Nedersaksies
??????
Z
Napulitano

Nordfriisk
Norfuk / Pitkern
Norsk bokm?l
Norsk nynorsk
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
 
?????
Oromoo
O?zbekcha/?
??????
P?lzisch
??????
Papiamentu
????
Patois
 
?????????
Piemontis
Tok Pisin
Plattdtsch
Polski
Portugus
Q?r?mtatarca
Reo tahiti
Ripoarisch
Roman?
Rumantsch
Runa Simi


 
Smegiella
Gagana Samoa
Sardu
Scots
Sesotho sa Leboa
Shqip
Sicilianu
?????
Simple English
Sloven?ina
Sloven??ina
? / ??????????
?l?nski
Soomaaliga
?????? ???????
Sranantongo
 / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / 
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
?????
Taqbaylit
/tatar?a
??????
???
??
Lea faka-Tonga
Trk?e
Trkmen?e
Twi
?
????
???????? / Uyghurche
Vahcuengh
Vneto
Veps?n kel
Ti?ng Vi?t
V?ro
Walon

West-Vlams
Winaray
Wolof

??????
Yorb
Z
Zazaki
?emait??ka

Edit links
This page was last modified on 28 July 2016, at 20:20.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
Florence
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Firenze" redirects here. For other uses, see Florence (disambiguation), Florentin (disambiguation), Florentine (disambiguation), and Firenze (disambiguation).
Florence
Firenze
Comune
Comune di Firenze
A collage of Florence showing the Galleria degli Uffizi (top left), followed by the Palazzo Pitti, a sunset view of the city and the Fountain of Neptune in the Piazza della Signoria.
A collage of Florence showing the Galleria degli Uffizi (top left), followed by the Palazzo Pitti, a sunset view of the city and the Fountain of Neptune in the Piazza della Signoria.
Flag of Florence
Flag	Coat of arms of Florence
Coat of arms
Florence is located in Italy FlorenceFlorence
Location of Florence in Italy
Coordinates: 4347N 1115ECoordinates: 4347N 1115E
Country	Italy
Region	Flag of Tuscany.svg Tuscany
Province / Metropolitan city	Florence (FI)
Government
 ? Mayor	Dario Nardella (PD)
Area
 ? Total	102.41 km2 (39.54 sq mi)
Elevation	50 m (160 ft)
Population (31 December 2015)[1]
 ? Total	382,808
 ? Density	3,700/km2 (9,700/sq mi)
Demonym(s)	Florentine, fiorentino
Time zone	CET (UTC+1)
 ? Summer (DST)	CEST (UTC+2)
Postal code	50121C50145
Dialing code	055
Patron saint	John the Baptist
Saint day	24 June
Website	Official website
Florence (/?fl?r?ns/ flor-?ns; Italian: Firenze [fi?r?ntse] ( listen))[2] is the capital city of the Italian region of Tuscany and of the Metropolitan City of Florence. It is the most populous city in Tuscany, with approximately 382,000 inhabitants, expanding to over 1,520,000 in the metropolitan area.[3]

Florence was a centre of medieval European trade and finance and one of the wealthiest cities of the time,[4] is considered the birthplace of the Renaissance, and has been called "the Athens of the Middle Ages".[5] A turbulent political history includes periods of rule by the powerful Medici family, and numerous religious and republican revolutions.[6] From 1865 to 1871 the city was the capital of the recently established Kingdom of Italy.

The Historic Centre of Florence attracts 13 millions of tourists each year, and Euromonitor International ranked the city as the world's 89th most visited in 2012, with 1.8 million visitors.[7] It was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1982. The city is noted for its culture, Renaissance art and architecture and monuments.[8] The city also contains numerous museums and art galleries, such as the Uffizi Gallery and the Palazzo Pitti, and still exerts an influence in the fields of art, culture and politics.[9] Due to Florence's artistic and architectural heritage, it has been ranked by Forbes as one of the most beautiful cities in the world.[10]

Florence is an important city in Italian fashion,[9] being ranked in the top 51 fashion capitals of the world;[11] furthermore, it is a major national economic centre,[9] as well as a tourist and industrial hub. In 2008, the city had the 17th highest average income in Italy.[12]

Contents
1	History
1.1	Roman origins
1.2	Second millennium
1.3	Middle Ages and Renaissance
1.3.1	Rise of the Medici
1.3.2	Savonarola and Machiavelli
1.4	18th and 19th centuries
1.5	20th century
2	Geography
2.1	Climate
3	Government
4	Main sights
4.1	Monuments, museums and religious buildings
4.2	Squares, streets and parks
5	Demographics
6	Economy
6.1	Industry, commerce and services
6.2	Tourism
6.3	Food and wine production
7	Culture
7.1	Art
7.2	Language
7.3	Literature
7.4	Music
7.5	Cinema
7.6	Cuisine
7.7	Research activity
7.8	Science and discovery
7.9	Fashion
7.10	Historical evocations
7.10.1	Scoppio del Carro
7.10.2	Calcio Storico
8	Transport
8.1	Railway station
8.2	Airport
9	Sport
10	International relations
10.1	Twin towns and sister cities
11	Other partnerships
12	Notable residents
13	See also
14	References
15	Sources
16	External links
History[edit]
Main articles: History of Florence and Timeline of Florence

The fa?ade of the Cathedral
Florence originated as a Roman city, and later, after a long period as a flourishing trading and banking medieval commune, it was the birthplace of the Italian Renaissance. According to the Encyclop?dia Britannica, it was politically, economically, and culturally one of the most important cities in Europe and the world from the 14th to 16th centuries.[8]

The language spoken in the city during the 14th century was, and still is, accepted as the Italian language. Almost all the writers and poets in Italian literature of the golden age are in some way connected with Florence, leading ultimately to the adoption of the Florentine dialect, above all the local dialects, as a literary language of choice.[13]

Starting from the late Middle Ages, Florentine moneyin the form of the gold florinfinanced the development of industry all over Europe, from Britain to Bruges, to Lyon and Hungary. Florentine bankers financed the English kings during the Hundred Years War. They similarly financed the papacy, including the construction of their provisional capital of Avignon and, after their return to Rome, the reconstruction and Renaissance embellishment of Rome.

Florence was home to the Medici, one of history's most important noble families. Lorenzo de' Medici was considered a political and cultural mastermind of Italy in the late 15th century. Two members of the family were popes in the early 16th century: Leo X and Clement VII. Catherine de Medici married king Henry II of France and, after his death in 1559, reigned as regent in France. The Medici reigned as Grand Dukes of Tuscany, starting with Cosimo I de' Medici in 1569 and ending with the death of Gian Gastone de' Medici in 1737.

Roman origins[edit]
The Etruscans initially formed a small settlement in 200 BC as the settlement of Fiesole (Faesulae in Latin),[14] which was destroyed by Lucius Cornelius Sulla in 80 BC in reprisal for supporting the populares faction in Rome. The present city of Florence was established by Julius Caesar in 59 BC as a settlement for his veteran soldiers and was named originally Fluentia, owing to the fact that it was built between two rivers, which was later changed to Florentia ("flowering").[15] It was built in the style of an army camp with the main streets, the cardo and the decumanus, intersecting at the present Piazza della Repubblica. Situated at the Via Cassia, the main route between Rome and the north, and within the fertile valley of the Arno, the settlement quickly became an important commercial centre.

In centuries to come, the city experienced turbulent periods of Ostrogothic rule, during which the city was often troubled by warfare between the Ostrogoths and the Byzantines, which may have caused the population to fall to as few as 1,000 people. Peace returned under Lombard rule in the 6th century. Florence was conquered by Charlemagne in 774 and became part of the Duchy of Tuscany, with Lucca as capital. The population began to grow again and commerce prospered. In 854, Florence and Fiesole were united in one county.[citation needed]

Second millennium[edit]
Margrave Hugo chose Florence as his residency instead of Lucca at about 1000 AD. The Golden Age of Florentine art began around this time. In 1013, construction began on the Basilica di San Miniato al Monte. The exterior of the baptistery was reworked in Romanesque style between 1059, and 1128. This period also saw the eclipse of Florence's formerly powerful rival Pisa (defeated by Genoa in 1284 and subjugated by Florence in 1406), and the exercise of power by the mercantile elite following an anti-aristocratic movement, led by Giano della Bella, that resulted in a set of laws called the Ordinances of Justice (1293).[citation needed]

Middle Ages and Renaissance[edit]
Main articles: Republic of Florence and Italian Renaissance
Rise of the Medici[edit]

Leonardo da Vinci statue outside the Uffizi Gallery
Of a population estimated at 94,000 before the Black Death of 1348,[16] about 25,000 are said to have been supported by the city's wool industry: in 1345 Florence was the scene of an attempted strike by wool combers (ciompi), who in 1378 rose up in a brief revolt against oligarchic rule in the Revolt of the Ciompi. After their suppression, Florence came under the sway (1382C1434) of the Albizzi family, bitter rivals of the Medici.

In the 15th century, Florence was among the largest cities in Europe, considered rich and economically successful. Life was not idyllic for all residents though, among whom there were great disparities in wealth.[17] Cosimo de' Medici was the first Medici family member to essentially control the city from behind the scenes. Although the city was technically a democracy of sorts, his power came from a vast patronage network along with his alliance to the new immigrants, the gente nuova (new people). The fact that the Medici were bankers to the pope also contributed to their ascendancy. Cosimo was succeeded by his son Piero, who was, soon after, succeeded by Cosimo's grandson, Lorenzo in 1469. Lorenzo was a great patron of the arts, commissioning works by Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci and Botticelli. Lorenzo was an accomplished musician and brought composers and singers to Florence, including Alexander Agricola, Johannes Ghiselin, and Heinrich Isaac. By contemporary Florentines (and since), he was known as "Lorenzo the Magnificent" (Lorenzo il Magnifico).

Following Lorenzo de' Medici's death in 1492, he was succeeded by his son Piero II. When the French king Charles VIII invaded northern Italy, Piero II chose to resist his army. But when he realized the size of the French army at the gates of Pisa, he had to accept the humiliating conditions of the French king. These made the Florentines rebel and they expelled Piero II. With his exile in 1494, the first period of Medici rule ended with the restoration of a republican government.

Savonarola and Machiavelli[edit]

Girolamo Savonarola being burnt at the stake in 1498
During this period, the Dominican friar Girolamo Savonarola had become prior of the San Marco monastery in 1490. He was famed for his penitential sermons, lambasting what he viewed as widespread immorality and attachment to material riches. He blamed the exile of the Medicis as the work of God, punishing them for their decadence. He seized the opportunity to carry through political reforms leading to a more democratic rule. But when Savonarola publicly accused Pope Alexander VI of corruption, he was banned from speaking in public. When he broke this ban, he was excommunicated. The Florentines, tired of his extreme teachings, turned against him and arrested him. He was convicted as a heretic and burned at the stake on the Piazza della Signoria on 23 May 1498.

A second individual of unusually acute insight was Niccol Machiavelli, whose prescriptions for Florence's regeneration under strong leadership have often been seen as a legitimization of political expediency and even malpractice. In other words, Machiavelli was a sort of political thinker, perhaps most renowned for his political handbook, titled The Prince, which is about ruling and the exercise of power. Commissioned by the Medici, Machiavelli also wrote the Florentine Histories, the history of the city. Florentines drove out the Medici for a second time and re-established a republic on 16 May 1527. Restored twice with the support of both Emperor and Pope, the Medici in 1537 became hereditary dukes of Florence, and in 1569 Grand Dukes of Tuscany, ruling for two centuries. In all Tuscany, only the Republic of Lucca (later a Duchy) and the Principality of Piombino were independent from Florence.

18th and 19th centuries[edit]

Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor and his family. Leopold was, from 1765 to 1790, the Grand Duke of Tuscany
The extinction of the Medici dynasty and the accession in 1737 of Francis Stephen, duke of Lorraine and husband of Maria Theresa of Austria, led to Tuscany's temporary inclusion in the territories of the Austrian crown. It became a secundogeniture of the Habsburg-Lorraine dynasty, who were deposed for the House of Bourbon-Parma in 1801, themselves deposed in December 1807 when Tuscany was annexed by France. Florence was the prefecture of the French dpartement of Arno from 1808 to the fall of Napoleon in 1814. The Habsburg-Lorraine dynasty was restored on the throne of Tuscany at the Congress of Vienna but finally deposed in 1859. Tuscany became a region of the Kingdom of Italy in 1861.

Florence replaced Turin as Italy's capital in 1865 and, in an effort to modernise the city, the old market in the Piazza del Mercato Vecchio and many medieval houses were pulled down and replaced by a more formal street plan with newer houses. The Piazza (first renamed Piazza Vittorio Emmanuele II, then Piazza della Repubblica, the present name) was significantly widened and a large triumphal arch was constructed at the west end. This development was unpopular and was prevented from continuing by the efforts of several British and American people living in the city.[citation needed] A museum recording the destruction stands nearby today.

The country's second capital city was superseded by Rome six years later, after the withdrawal of the French troops made its addition to the kingdom possible.

20th century[edit]

Porte Sante cemetery, burial place of notable figures of Florentine history.
After doubling during the 19th century, Florence's population was to triple in the 20th, resulting from growth in tourism, trade, financial services and industry.

During World War II the city experienced a year-long German occupation (1943C1944) and was declared an open city. The Allied soldiers who died driving the Germans from Tuscany are buried in cemeteries outside the city (Americans about nine kilometres (5.6 miles) south of the city, British and Commonwealth soldiers a few kilometres east of the centre on the right bank of the Arno). In 1944, the retreating Germans demolished the bridges along the Arno linking the district of Oltrarno to the rest of the city, making it difficult for the British troops to cross. However, at the last moment Charle Steinhauslin, at the time consulate of 26 countries in Florence, convinced the German general in Italy that the Ponte Vecchio was not to be destroyed due to its historical value.[citation needed]

Instead, an equally historic area of streets directly to the south of the bridge, including part of the Corridoio Vasariano, was destroyed using mines. Since then the bridges have been restored to their original forms using as many of the remaining materials as possible, but the buildings surrounding the Ponte Vecchio have been rebuilt in a style combining the old with modern design. Shortly before leaving Florence, as they knew that they would soon have to retreat, the Germans executed many freedom fighters and political opponents publicly, in streets and squares including the Piazza Santo Spirito.[citation needed]

At the end of World War II in Europe, in May 1945, the U.S. Army's Information and Educational Branch was ordered to establish an overseas university campus for demobilized American service men and women in Florence, Italy. The first American University for service personnel was established in June 1945 at the School of Aeronautics in Florence, Italy. Some 7,500 soldier-students were to pass through the University during its four one-month sessions (see G. I. American Universities).[18]

In November 1966, the Arno flooded parts of the centre, damaging many art treasures. Around the city there are tiny placards on the walls noting where the flood waters reached at their highest point.

On 25 May 2016 the BBC reported that a sinkhole, thought to have been caused by a bursting of a water pipe, opened up a 200-meter hole on the Arno river bank in Florence.[19]

Geography[edit]

November 2005 city view in the Arno's valley, in the background the Apennine mountains
Florence lies in a basin formed by the hills of Careggi, Fiesole, Settignano, Arcetri, Poggio Imperiale and Bellosguardo (Florence). The Arno river and three other minor rivers flow through it.

Climate[edit]

Florence under the snow in December 2009.
Florence has a humid subtropical climate (Cfa), slightly tending to Mediterranean (Csa).[20] It has hot summers with moderate or light rainfall and cool, damp winters. As Florence lacks a prevailing wind, summer temperatures are higher than along the coast. Rainfall in summer is convectional, while relief rainfall dominates in the winter. Snowfalls happen almost every year,[21] though often they do not leave traces on the ground. The highest officially recorded temperature was 42.6 C (108.7 F) on 26 July 1983 and the lowest was ?23.2 C (?9.8 F) on 12 January 1985.[22]



Climate data for Florence
Month	Jan	Feb	Mar	Apr	May	Jun	Jul	Aug	Sep	Oct	Nov	Dec	Year
Record high C (F)	21.6
(70.9)	23.4
(74.1)	28.5
(83.3)	28.7
(83.7)	33.8
(92.8)	40.0
(104)	42.6
(108.7)	39.5
(103.1)	36.4
(97.5)	30.8
(87.4)	25.2
(77.4)	20.4
(68.7)	42.6
(108.7)
Average high C (F)	10.9
(51.6)	12.5
(54.5)	15.7
(60.3)	18.5
(65.3)	23.7
(74.7)	27.7
(81.9)	31.4
(88.5)	31.5
(88.7)	26.7
(80.1)	20.9
(69.6)	14.7
(58.5)	11.1
(52)	20.44
(68.81)
Daily mean C (F)	6.5
(43.7)	7.5
(45.5)	10.3
(50.5)	13.0
(55.4)	17.7
(63.9)	21.4
(70.5)	24.6
(76.3)	24.6
(76.3)	20.5
(68.9)	15.5
(59.9)	9.9
(49.8)	6.8
(44.2)	14.86
(58.74)
Average low C (F)	2.0
(35.6)	2.5
(36.5)	4.9
(40.8)	7.5
(45.5)	11.6
(52.9)	15.0
(59)	17.7
(63.9)	17.7
(63.9)	14.4
(57.9)	10.1
(50.2)	5.1
(41.2)	2.6
(36.7)	9.26
(48.67)
Record low C (F)	?23.2
(?9.8)	?9.9
(14.2)	?8.0
(17.6)	?2.2
(28)	3.6
(38.5)	5.6
(42.1)	10.2
(50.4)	9.6
(49.3)	3.6
(38.5)	?1.4
(29.5)	?6.0
(21.2)	?8.6
(16.5)	?23.2
(?9.8)
Average precipitation mm (inches)	60.5
(2.382)	63.7
(2.508)	63.5
(2.5)	86.4
(3.402)	70.0
(2.756)	57.1
(2.248)	36.7
(1.445)	56.0
(2.205)	79.6
(3.134)	104.2
(4.102)	113.6
(4.472)	81.3
(3.201)	872.6
(34.355)
Average precipitation days ( 1.0 mm)	8.3	7.1	7.5	9.7	8.4	6.3	3.5	5.4	6.2	8.5	9.0	8.3	88.2
Source #1: Servizio Meteorologico [23]
Source #2: World Meteorological Organisation (United Nations) [24]
Government[edit]
See also: List of mayors of Florence

The traditional boroughs of the whole comune of Florence
 

The 5 administrative boroughs of the whole comune of Florence
The legislative body of the municipality is the City Council (Consiglio Comunale), which is composed of 36 councillors elected every five years with a proportional system, contextually to the mayoral elections. The executive body is the City Committee (Giunta Comunale), composed by 7 assessors, that is nominated and presieded over by a directly elected Mayor. The current mayor of Florence is Dario Nardella.

The municipality of Florence is subdivided into five administrative Boroughs (Quartieri). Each Borough is governed by a Council (Consiglio) and a President, elected contextually to the city Mayor. The urban organization is governed by the Italian Constitution (art. 114). The Boroughs have the power to advise the Mayor with nonbinding opinions on a large spectrum of topics (environment, construction, public health, local markets) and exercise the functions delegated to them by the City Council; in addition they are supplied with an autonomous founding in order to finance local activities. The Boroughs are:

Centro storico (Historic Centre); population: 67,170;
Campo di Marte; population: 88,588;
Gavinana-Galluzzo; population: 40,907;
Isolotto-Legnaia; population: 66,636;
Rifredi; population: 103,761.
All of the five boroughs are governed by the Democratic Party.

The current Italian Prime Minister, Matteo Renzi, served as mayor from 2009 to 2014.

Main sights[edit]
Main article: Architecture of Florence

Florence Cathedral

Palazzo Vecchio

Ponte Vecchio, which spans the Arno river
Florence is known as the "cradle of the Renaissance" (la culla del Rinascimento) for its monuments, churches, and buildings. The best-known site of Florence is the domed cathedral of the city, Santa Maria del Fiore, known as The Duomo, whose dome was built by Filippo Brunelleschi. The nearby Campanile (partly designed by Giotto) and the Baptistery buildings are also highlights. The dome, 600 years after its completion, is still the largest dome built in brick and mortar in the world.[25] In 1982, the historic centre of Florence (Italian: centro storico di Firenze) was declared a World Heritage Site by the UNESCO.[26] The centre of the city is contained in medieval walls that were built in the 14th century to defend the city. At the heart of the city, in Piazza della Signoria, is Bartolomeo Ammanati's Fountain of Neptune (1563C1565), which is a masterpiece of marble sculpture at the terminus of a still functioning Roman aqueduct.

The layout and structure of Florence in many ways harkens back to the Roman era, where it was designed as a garrison settlement.[8] Nevertheless, the majority of the city was built during the Renaissance.[8] Despite the strong presence of Renaissance architecture within the city, traces of medieval, Baroque, Neoclassical and modern architecture can be found. The Palazzo Vecchio as well as the Duomo, or the city's Cathedral, are the two buildings which dominate Florence's skyline.[8]

The River Arno, which cuts through the old part of the city, is as much a character in Florentine history as many of the people who lived there. Historically, the locals have had a love-hate relationship with the Arno C which alternated between nourishing the city with commerce, and destroying it by flood.


Florence at night from Piazzale Michelangelo
One of the bridges in particular stands out  the Ponte Vecchio (Old Bridge), whose most striking feature is the multitude of shops built upon its edges, held up by stilts. The bridge also carries Vasari's elevated corridor linking the Uffizi to the Medici residence (Palazzo Pitti). Although the original bridge was constructed by the Etruscans, the current bridge was rebuilt in the 14th century. It is the only bridge in the city to have survived World War II intact. It is the first example in the western world of a bridge built using segmental arches, that is, arches less than a semicircle, to reduce both span-to-rise ratio and the numbers of pillars to allow lesser encumbrance in the riverbed (being in this much more successful than the Roman Alcontar Bridge).


Ponte Santa Trinita with the Oltrarno district
The church of San Lorenzo contains the Medici Chapel, the mausoleum of the Medici familythe most powerful family in Florence from the 15th to the 18th century. Nearby is the Uffizi Gallery, one of the finest art museums in the world C founded on a large bequest from the last member of the Medici family.


Florence Duomo as seen from Michelangelo hill.
The Uffizi is located at the corner of Piazza della Signoria, a site important for being the centre of Florence's civil life and government for centuries. The Palazzo della Signoria facing it is still home of the municipal government. The Loggia dei Lanzi provided the setting for all the public ceremonies of the republican government. Many significant episodes in the history of art and political changes were staged here, such as:

In 1301, Dante Alighieri was sent into exile from here (commemorated by a plaque on one of the walls of the Uffizi).
On 26 April 1478, Jacopo de' Pazzi and his retainers tried to raise the city against the Medici after the plot known as The congiura dei Pazzi (The Pazzi conspiracy), murdering Giuliano di Piero de' Medici and wounding his brother Lorenzo. All the members of the plot who could be apprehended were seized by the Florentines and hanged from the windows of the palace.
In 1497, it was the location of the Bonfire of the Vanities instigated by the Dominican friar and preacher Girolamo Savonarola
On 23 May 1498, the same Savonarola and two followers were hanged and burnt at the stake. (A round plate in the ground marks the spot where he was hanged)
In 1504, Michelangelo's David (now replaced by a replica, since the original was moved in 1873 to the Galleria dell'Accademia) was installed in front of the Palazzo della Signoria (also known as Palazzo Vecchio).
The Piazza della Signoria is the location of a number of statues by other sculptors such as Donatello, Giambologna, Ammannati and Cellini, although some have been replaced with copies to preserve the originals.

Monuments, museums and religious buildings[edit]
See also: List of churches in Florence and Theatres in Florence

Piazzale degli Uffizi
Florence contains several palaces and buildings from various eras. The Palazzo Vecchio is the town hall of Florence and also an art museum. This large Romanesque crenellated fortress-palace overlooks the Piazza della Signoria with its copy of Michelangelo's David statue as well the gallery of statues in the adjacent Loggia dei Lanzi. Originally called the Palazzo della Signoria, after the Signoria of Florence, the ruling body of the Republic of Florence, it was also given several other names: Palazzo del Popolo, Palazzo dei Priori, and Palazzo Ducale, in accordance with the varying use of the palace during its long history. The building acquired its current name when the Medici duke's residence was moved across the Arno to the Palazzo Pitti. It is linked to the Uffizi and the Palazzo Pitti through the Corridoio Vasariano.

Palazzo Medici Riccardi, designed by Michelozzo di Bartolomeo for Cosimo il Vecchio, of the Medici family, is another major edifice, and was built between 1445 and 1460. It was well known for its stone masonry that includes rustication and ashlar. Today it is the head office of the Metropolitan City of Florence and hosts museums and the Riccardiana Library. The Palazzo Strozzi, an example of civil architecture with its rusticated stone, was inspired by the Palazzo Medici, but with more harmonious proportions. Today the palace is used for international expositions like the annual antique show (founded as the Biennale del'Antiquariato in 1959), fashion shows and other cultural and artistic events. Here also is the seat of the Istituto Nazionale del Rinascimento and the noted Gabinetto Vieusseux, with the library and reading room. Aside from these palaces and buildings, there are several others, including the Palazzo Rucellai, designed by Leon Battista Alberti between 1446 and 1451 and executed, at least in part, by Bernardo Rossellino; the Palazzo Davanzati, which houses the museum of the Old Florentine House; the Palazzo delle Assicurazioni Generali, designed in the Neo-Renaissance style in 1871; the Palazzo Spini Feroni, in Piazza Santa Trinita, a historic 13th-century private palace, owned since the 1920s by shoe-designer Salvatore Ferragamo; as well as various others, including the Palazzo Borghese, the Palazzo di Bianca Cappello, the Palazzo Antinori, and the Royal building of Santa Maria Novella.


Palazzo Pitti on Boboli Gardens' side
Florence contains numerous museums and art galleries where some of the world's most important works of art are held. The city is one of the best preserved Renaissance centres of art and architecture in the world and has a high concentration of art, architecture and culture.[27] In the ranking list of the 15 most visited Italian art museums, ? are represented by Florentine museums.[28] The Uffizi is one of these, having a very large collection of international and Florentine art. The gallery is articulated in many halls, cataloged by schools and chronological order. Engendered by the Medici family's artistic collections through the centuries, it houses works of art by various painters and artists. The Vasari Corridor is another gallery, built connecting the Palazzo Vecchio with the Pitti Palace passing by the Uffizi and over the Ponte Vecchio. The Galleria dell' Accademia houses a Michelangelo collection, including the David. It has a collection of Russian icons and works by various artists and painters. Furthermore, other museums and galleries include the Bargello, which concentrates on sculpture works by artists including Donatello, Giambologna and Michelangelo; the Palazzo Pitti, containing part of the Medici family's former private collection. In addition to the Medici collection, the palace's galleries contain many Renaissance works, including several by Raphael and Titian, large collections of costumes, ceremonial carriages, silver, porcelain and a gallery of modern art dating from the 18th century. Adjoining the palace are the Boboli Gardens, elaborately landscaped and with numerous sculptures.

There are several different churches and religious buildings in Florence. The cathedral is the Santa Maria del Fiore. The San Giovanni Baptistery is located in front of the cathedral, and is decorated by numerous artists, notably by Lorenzo Ghiberti with the Gates of Paradise. Other churches in Florence include the Basilica of Santa Maria Novella, located in Santa Maria Novella square (near the Firenze Santa Maria Novella railway station) which contains works by Masaccio, Paolo Uccello, Filippino Lippi and Domenico Ghirlandaio; the Basilica of Santa Croce, the principal Franciscan church in the city, which is situated on the Piazza di Santa Croce, about 800 metres (2,600 feet) south east of the Duomo, and is the burial place of some of the most illustrious Italians, such as Michelangelo, Galileo, Machiavelli, Foscolo, Gentile, Rossini, and Marconi, thus it is known also as the Temple of the Italian Glories (Tempio dell'Itale Glorie); the Basilica of San Lorenzo, which is one of the largest churches in the city, situated at the centre of Florence's main market district, and the burial place of all the principal members of the Medici family from Cosimo il Vecchio to Cosimo III; Santo Spirito, in the Oltrarno quarter, facing the square with the same name; Orsanmichele, whose building was constructed on the site of the kitchen garden of the monastery of San Michele, now demolished; Santissima Annunziata, a Roman Catholic basilica and the mother church of the Servite order; Ognissanti, which was founded by the lay order of the Umiliati, and is among the first examples of Baroque architecture built in the city; the Santa Maria del Carmine, in the Oltrarno district of Florence, which is the location of the Brancacci Chapel, housing outstanding Renaissance frescoes by Masaccio and Masolino da Panicale, later finished by Filippino Lippi; the Medici Chapel, in the San Lorenzo; as well as several others, including Santa Trinita, San Marco, Santa Felicita, Badia Fiorentina, San Gaetano, San Miniato al Monte, Florence Charterhouse, and Santa Maria del Carmine. The city additionally contains the Orthodox Russian church of Nativity, and the Great Synagogue of Florence, built in the 19th century.

Additionally, Florence contains various theatres and cinemas. The Odeon Cinema of the Palazzo dello Strozzino is one of the oldest movie theatres in the city. Established from 1920 to 1922[29] in a wing of the Palazzo dello Strozzino, it used to be called the Cinema Teatro Savoia (Savoy Cinema-Theatre), yet was later called Odeon. The Teatro della Pergola, located in the centre of the city on the eponymous street, is an opera house built in the 17th century. Another theatre is the Teatro Comunale (or Teatro del Maggio Musicale Fiorentino), originally built as the open-air amphitheatre, the Politeama Fiorentino Vittorio Emanuele, which was inaugurated on 17 May 1862 with a production of Donizetti's Lucia di Lammermoor and which seated 6,000 people. There are several other theatres, such as the Saloncino Castinelli, the Teatro Puccini, the Teatro Verdi, the Teatro Goldoni and the Teatro Niccolini.

Squares, streets and parks[edit]
See also: Squares of Florence

Piazza della Repubblica

Panorama composite, overview of Firenze, taken from the Giardino Bardini viewpoint.
Aside from such monuments, Florence contains numerous major squares (piazze) and streets. The Piazza della Repubblica is a square in the city centre, location of the cultural cafes and bourgeois palaces. Among the square's cafes (like Caff Gilli, Paszkowski or the Hard Rock Caf), the Giubbe Rosse cafe has long been a meeting place for artists and writers, notably those of Futurism. The Piazza Santa Croce is another; dominated by the Basilica of Santa Croce, it is a rectangular square in the centre of the city where the Calcio Fiorentino is played every year. Furthermore, there is the Piazza Santa Trinita, a square near the Arno that mark the end of the Via de' Tornabuoni street.

Other squares include the Piazza San Marco, the Piazza Santa Maria Novella, the Piazza Beccaria and the Piazza della Libert. The centre additionally contains several streets. Such include the Via Camillo Cavour, one of the main roads of the northern area of the historic centre; the Via Ghibellina, one of central Florence's longest streets; the Via dei Calzaiuoli, one of the most central streets of the historic centre which links Piazza del Duomo to Piazza della Signoria, winding parallel to via Roma and Piazza della Repubblica; the Via de' Tornabuoni, a luxurious street in the city centre that goes from Antinori square to ponte Santa Trinita, across Piazza Santa Trinita, characterised by the presence of fashion boutiques; the Viali di Circonvallazione, 6-lane boulevards surrounding the northern part of the historic centre; as well as others, such as Via Roma, Via degli Speziali, Via de' Cerretani, and the Viale dei Colli.

Florence also contains various parks and gardens. Such include the Boboli Gardens, the Parco delle Cascine, the Giardino Bardini and the Giardino dei Semplici, amongst others.

Demographics[edit]
Historical population
Year	Pop.	%
1200	50,000	    
1300	120,000	+140.0%
1500	70,000	?41.7%
1650	70,000	+0.0%
1861	150,864	+115.5%
1871	201,138	+33.3%
1881	196,072	?2.5%
1901	236,635	+20.7%
1911	258,056	+9.1%
1921	280,133	+8.6%
1931	304,160	+8.6%
1936	321,176	+5.6%
1951	374,625	+16.6%
1961	436,516	+16.5%
1971	457,803	+4.9%
1981	448,331	?2.1%
1991	403,294	?10.0%
2001	356,118	?11.7%
2011	358,079	+0.6%
Source: ISTAT 2011
In 1200 the city was home to 50,000 people.[30] By 1300 the population of the city proper was 120,000, with an additional 300,000 living in the Contado.[31] Between 1500 and 1650 the population was around 70,000.[32][33]

As of 31 October 2010, the population of the city proper is 370,702, while Eurostat estimates that 696,767 people live in the urban area of Florence. The Metropolitan Area of Florence, Prato and Pistoia, constituted in 2000 over an area of roughly 4,800 square kilometres (1,853 sq mi), is home to 1.5 million people. Within Florence proper, 46.8% of the population was male in 2007 and 53.2% were female. Minors (children aged 18 and less) totalled 14.10 percent of the population compared to pensioners, who numbered 25.95 percent. This compares with the Italian average of 18.06 percent (minors) and 19.94 percent (pensioners). The average age of Florence resident is 49 compared to the Italian average of 42. In the five years between 2002 and 2007, the population of Florence grew by 3.22 percent, while Italy as a whole grew by 3.56 percent.[34] The birth rate of Florence is 7.66 births per 1,000 inhabitants compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births.

As of 2009, 87.46% of the population was Italian. An estimated 6,000 Chinese live in the city.[35] The largest immigrant group came from other European countries (mostly Romanians and Albanians): 3.52%, East Asia (mostly Chinese and Filipino): 2.17%, the Americas: 1.41%, and North Africa (mostly Moroccan): 0.9%.[36]

Economy[edit]
Tourism is, by far, the most important of all industries and most of the Florentine economy relies on the money generated by international arrivals and students studying in the city.[8] Manufacturing and commerce, however, still remain highly important. Florence is also Italy's 17th richest city in terms of average workers' earnings, with the figure being 23,265 (the overall city's income is 6,531,204,473), coming after Mantua, yet surpassing Bolzano.[37]

In 2013, Florence was listed as the second best world city by Cond Nast Traveler.[38]

Industry, commerce and services[edit]
Florence is a major production and commercial centre in Italy, where the Florentine industrial complexes in the suburbs produce all sorts of goods, from furniture, rubber goods, chemicals, and food.[8] However, traditional and local products, such as antiques, handicrafts, glassware, leatherwork, art reproductions, jewelry, souvenirs, elaborate metal and iron-work, shoes, accessories and high fashion clothes also dominate a fair sector of Florence's economy.[8] The city's income relies partially on services and commercial and cultural interests, such as annual fairs, theatrical and lyrical productions, art exhibitions, festivals and fashion shows, such as the Calcio Fiorentino. Heavy industry and machinery also take their part in providing an income. In Nuovo Pignone, numerous factories are still present, and small-to medium industrial businesses are dominant. The Florence-Prato-Pistoia industrial districts and areas were known as the 'Third Italy' in the 1990s, due to the exports of high-quality goods and automobile (especially the Vespa) and the prosperity and productivity of the Florentine entrepreneurs. Some of these industries even rivaled the traditional industrial districts in Emilia-Romagna and Veneto due to high profits and productivity.[8]

Tourism[edit]

Tourists flock to the Fontana del Porcellino.
Tourism is the most significant industry in central Florence. From April to October, tourists outnumber local population. Tickets to the Uffizi and Accademia museums are regularly sold out and large groups regularly fill the basilicas of Santa Croce and Santa Maria Novella, both of which charge for entry. Tickets for The Uffizi and Accademia can be purchased online prior to visiting.[39] In 2010, readers of Travel + Leisure magazine ranked the city as their third favourite tourist destination.[40] Studies by Euromonitor International have concluded that cultural and history-oriented tourism is generating significantly increased spending throughout Europe.[41]

Florence is believed to have the greatest concentration of art (in proportion to its size) in the world.[42] Thus, cultural tourism is particularly strong, with world-renowned museums such as the Uffizi selling over 1.6 million tickets[43] a year. The city's convention centre facilities were restructured during the 1990s and host exhibitions, conferences, meetings, social forums, concerts and other events all year.

Florence has approximately 35,000 hotel beds and 23,000 other accommodation facilities (campsites, guesthouses, youth hostels and farmhouses), giving potential for overall stays to exceed 10 million visitor/nights a year. Visitors also include thousands of day-trippers brought in by cruise ships (to Livorno) and by road and rail. In 2007, the city ranked as the world's 59th most visited city, with over 1.729 million arrivals for the year.[44] It has been estimated that just under one-third of tourists are Italians, the remainder comprising Americans (20%), Germans (13%), Japanese (8%), Britons (7.8%), French (5.7%) and Spaniards (5%).

Food and wine production[edit]
Food and wine have long been an important staple of the economy. The Chianti region is just south of the city, and its Sangiovese grapes figure prominently not only in its Chianti Classico wines but also in many of the more recently developed Supertuscan blends. Within 32 km (20 mi) to the west is the Carmignano area, also home to flavorful sangiovese-based reds. The celebrated Chianti Rufina district, geographically and historically separated from the main Chianti region, is also few kilometres east of Florence. More recently, the Bolgheri region (about 150 km (93 mi) southwest of Florence) has become celebrated for its "Super Tuscan" reds such as Sassicaia and Ornellaia.[45]

Culture[edit]
Art[edit]
Main article: Art in Florence
See also: Guilds of Florence

Botticelli's Venus, stored in the Uffizi

Sculptures in the Loggia dei Lanzi
Cimabue and Giotto, the fathers of Italian painting, lived in Florence as well as Arnolfo and Andrea Pisano, renewers of architecture and sculpture; Brunelleschi, Donatello and Masaccio, forefathers of the Renaissance, Ghiberti and the Della Robbias, Filippo Lippi and Angelico; Botticelli, Paolo Uccello and the universal genius of Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo.[46][47]

Their works, together with those of many other generations of artists, are gathered in the several museums of the town: the Uffizi Gallery, the Palatina gallery with the paintings of the "Golden Ages",[48] the Bargello with the sculptures of the Renaissance, the museum of San Marco with Fra Angelico's works, the Academy, the chapels of the Medicis[49] Buonarroti's house with the sculptures of Michelangelo, the following museums: Bardini, Horne, Stibbert, Romano, Corsini, The Gallery of Modern Art, the Museo dell'Opera del Duomo, the museum of Silverware and the museum of Precious Stones.[50] Several monuments are located in Florence: the Florence Baptistery with its mosaics; the Cathedral with its sculptures, the medieval churches with bands of frescoes; public as well as private palaces: Palazzo Vecchio, Palazzo Pitti, Palazzo Medici Riccardi, Palazzo Davanzati; monasteries, cloisters, refectories; the "Certosa". In the archeological museum includes documents of Etruscan civilization.[51] In fact the city is so rich in art that some first time visitors experience the Stendhal syndrome as they encounter its art for the first time.[52]


Uffizi hallway
Florentine architects such as Filippo Brunelleschi (1377C1466) and Leon Battista Alberti (1404C1472) were among the fathers of both Renaissance and Neoclassical architecture.[53]

The cathedral, topped by Brunelleschi's dome, dominates the Florentine skyline. The Florentines decided to start building it C late in the 13th century, without a design for the dome. The project proposed by Brunelleschi in the 14th century was the largest ever built at the time, and the first major dome built in Europe since the two great domes of Roman times C the Pantheon in Rome, and Hagia Sophia in Constantinople. The dome of Santa Maria del Fiore remains the largest brick construction of its kind in the world.[54][55] In front of it is the medieval Baptistery. The two buildings incorporate in their decoration the transition from the Middle Ages to the Renaissance. In recent years, most of the important works of art from the two buildings C and from the nearby Giotto's Campanile, have been removed and replaced by copies. The originals are now housed in the Museum dell'Opera del Duomo, just to the east of the Cathedral.

Florence has large numbers of art-filled churches, such as San Miniato al Monte, San Lorenzo, Santa Maria Novella, Santa Trinita, Santa Maria del Carmine, Santa Croce, Santo Spirito, the Annunziata, Ognissanti and numerous others.[8]


The Palazzo della Signoria, better known as the Palazzo Vecchio (English:The Old Palace)
Artists associated with Florence range from Arnolfo di Cambio and Cimabue to Giotto, Nanni di Banco, and Paolo Uccello; through Lorenzo Ghiberti, and Donatello and Massaccio and the della Robbia family; through Fra Angelico and Botticelli and Piero della Francesca, and on to Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci. Others include Benvenuto Cellini, Andrea del Sarto, Benozzo Gozzoli, Domenico Ghirlandaio, Filippo Lippi, Bernardo Buontalenti, Orcagna, Pollaiuolo, Filippino Lippi, Verrocchio, Bronzino, Desiderio da Settignano, Michelozzo, the Rossellis, the Sangallos, and Pontormo. Artists from other regions who worked in Florence include Raphael, Andrea Pisano, Giambologna, Il Sodoma and Peter Paul Rubens.


Brunelleschi's dome
Picture galleries in Florence include the Uffizi and the Pitti Palace. Two superb collections of sculpture are in the Bargello and the Museum of the Works of the Duomo. They are filled with the creations of Donatello, Verrochio, Desiderio da Settignano, Michelangelo and others. The Galleria dell'Accademia has Michelangelo's David C perhaps the most well-known work of art anywhere, plus the unfinished statues of the slaves Michelangelo created for the tomb of Pope Julius II.[56][57] Other sights include the medieval city hall, the Palazzo della Signoria (also known as the Palazzo Vecchio), the Archeological Museum, the Museum of the History of Science, the Palazzo Davanzatti, the Stibbert Museum, St. Marks, the Medici Chapels, the Museum of the Works of Santa Croce, the Museum of the Cloister of Santa Maria Novella, the Zoological Museum ("La Specola"), the Bardini, and the Museo Horne. There is also a collection of works by the modern sculptor, Marino Marini, in a museum named after him. The Strozzi Palace is the site of special exhibits.[58]

Language[edit]
Main article: Florentine dialect
See also: Tuscan language
Florentine (fiorentino), spoken by inhabitants of Florence and its environs, is a Tuscan dialect and the immediate parent language to modern Italian.

Its vocabulary and pronunciation are largely identical to standard Italian, though the hard c [k] between two vowels (as in ducato) is pronounced as a fricative [h], similar to an English h. This gives Florentines a highly recognizable accent (the so-called gorgia toscana). Other traits include using a form of the subjunctive mood last commonly used in medieval times,[citation needed] a frequent usage in everyday speech of the modern subjunctive, and a shortened pronunciation of the definite article, [i] instead of "il".

Dante, Petrarch, and Boccaccio pioneered the use of the vernacular[59] instead of the Latin used for most literary works at the time.

Literature[edit]

The introduction of the Decameron (1350C1353) by Giovanni Boccaccio.
Despite Latin being the main language of the courts and the Church, writers such as Dante Alighieri[59] and many others used their own language, the Florentine dialect, in composing their works. The oldest literary pieces written in vernacular language go as far back as the 13th century. Florence's literature fully blossomed in the 14th century, when not only Dante with his Divine Comedy (1306C1321) and Petrarch, but also poets such as Guido Cavalcanti and Lapo Gianni composed their most important works.[59] Dante's masterpiece is the Divine Comedy, which mainly deals with the poet himself taking an allegoric and moral tour of Hell, Purgatory and finally Heaven, during which he meets numerous mythological or real characters of his age or before. He is first guided by the Roman poet Virgil, whose non-Christian beliefs damned him to Hell. Later on he is joined by Beatrice, who guides him through Heaven.[59]

In the 14th century, Petrarch[60] and Giovanni Boccaccio[60] led the literary scene in Florence after Dante's death in 1321. Petrarch was an all-rounder writer, author and poet, but was particularly known for his Canzoniere, or the Book of Songs, where he conveyed his unremitting love for Laura.[60] His style of writing has since become known as Petrarchism.[60] Boccaccio was better known for his Decameron, a slightly grim story of Florence during the 1350s bubonic plague, known as the Black Death, when some people fled the ravaged city to an isolated country mansion, and spent their time there recounting stories and novellas taken from the medieval and contemporary tradition. All of this is written in a series of 100 distinct novellas.[60]

In the 16th century, during the Renaissance, Florence was the hometown of political writer and philosopher Niccol Machiavelli, whose ideas on how rulers should govern the land, detailed in The Prince, spread across European courts and enjoyed enduring popularity for centuries. These principles became known as Machiavellianism.

Music[edit]
Main article: Music of Florence
See also: Music of Tuscany
Florence became a musical centre during the Middle Ages and music and the performing arts remain an important part of its culture. During the Renaissance there were four kinds of musical patronage in the city with respect to both sacred and secular music: state, corporate, church, and private.[61] and it was here that the Florentine Camerata convened in the mid-16th century and experimented with setting tales of Greek mythology to music and staging the resultin other words, the first operas, setting the wheels in motion not just for the further development of the operatic form, but for later developments of separate "classical" forms such as the symphony.

Opera was invented in Florence in the late 16th century.[62]

Composers and musicians who have lived in Florence include Piero Strozzi (1550 C after 1608), Giulio Caccini (1551C1618) and Mike Francis (1961C2009).

Cinema[edit]
Florence has been a setting for numerous works of fiction and movies, including the novels and associated films, such as Light in the Piazza, Calmi Cuori Appassionati, Hannibal, A Room with a View, Tea with Mussolini and Virgin Territory. The city is home to renowned Italian actors and actresses, such as Roberto Benigni, Leonardo Pieraccioni and Vittoria Puccini.

Cuisine[edit]
Florentine food grows out of a tradition of peasant eating rather than rarefied high cooking. The majority of dishes are based on meat. The whole animal was traditionally eaten; tripe (trippa) and stomach (lampredotto) were once regularly on the menu and still are sold at the food carts stationed throughout the city. Antipasti include crostini toscani, sliced bread rounds topped with a chicken liver-based pat, and sliced meats (mainly prosciutto and salame, often served with melon when in season). The typically saltless Tuscan bread, obtained with natural levain frequently features in Florentine courses, especially in its soups, ribollita and pappa al pomodoro, or in the salad of bread and fresh vegetables called panzanella that is served in summer. The bistecca alla fiorentina is a large (the customary size should weigh around 1200 grams C "40 oz.") C the "date" steak C T-bone steak of Chianina beef cooked over hot charcoal and served very rare with its more recently derived version, the tagliata, sliced rare beef served on a bed of arugula, often with slices of Parmesan cheese on top. Most of these courses are generally served with local olive oil, also a prime product enjoying a worldwide reputation.[63]
Among the desserts, "schiacciata alla fiorentina" ("white flatbread cake") is one of the most popular; it is a very soft cake, prepared with extremely simple ingredients as it is peculiar of the florentine cuisine, and it is typically eaten on Carnival time.

Research activity[edit]

UNICEF Innocenti Research Centre
Research institutes and university departments are located within the Florence area and within two campuses at Polo di Novoli and Polo Scientifico di Sesto Fiorentino[64] as well as in the Research Area of Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche.[65]

Science and discovery[edit]

A display of proboscideans in the Museo di Storia Naturale di Firenze, or the Natural History Museum of Florence
Florence has been an important scientific centre for centuries, notably during the Renaissance with scientists such as Leonardo da Vinci.

Florentines were one of the driving forces behind the Age of Discovery. Florentine bankers financed Henry the Navigator and the Portuguese explorers who pioneered the route around Africa to India and the Far East. It was a map drawn by the Florentine Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli, a student of Brunelleschi, that Christopher Columbus used to sell his "enterprise" to the Spanish monarchs, and which he used on his first voyage. Mercator's "Projection" is a refined version of Toscanelli's C taking into account the Americas, of which the Florentine was, obviously, ignorant.

Galileo and other scientists pioneered the study of optics, ballistics, astronomy, anatomy, and so on. Pico della Mirandola, Leonardo Bruni, Machiavelli, and many others laid the groundwork for our understanding of science.

Fashion[edit]
Main article: Italian fashion
See also: Fashion designers of Florence and Polimoda

Luxury boutiques along Florence's prestigious Via de' Tornabuoni.
By the year 1300 Florence had become a center of textile production in Europe. Many of the rich families in Renaissance Florence were major purchasers of locally produced fine clothing, and the specialists of fashion in the economy and culture of Florence during that period is often underestimated.[66] Florence is regarded by some as the birthplace and earliest center of the modern (post World War Two) fashion industry in Italy. The Florentine "soires" of the early 1950s organized by Giovanni Battista Giorgini were events where several Italian designers participated in group shows and first garnered international attention.[67] Florence has served as the home of the Italian fashion company Salvatore Ferragamo since 1928. Gucci, Roberto Cavalli, and Emilio Pucci are also headquartered in Florence. Other major players in the fashion industry such as Prada and Chanel have large offices and stores in Florence or its outskirts. Florence's main upscale shopping street is Via de' Tornabuoni, where major luxury fashion houses and jewelry labels, such as Armani and Bulgari, have their elegant boutiques. Via del Parione and Via Roma are other streets that are also well known for their high-end fashion stores.[68]

Historical evocations[edit]
Scoppio del Carro[edit]
The Scoppio del Carro ("Explosion of the Cart") is a celebration of the First Crusade. During the day of Easter, a cart, which the Florentines call the Brindellone and which is led by four white oxen, is taken to the Piazza del Duomo between the Baptistery of St. John the Baptist (Battistero di San Giovanni) and the Florence Cathedral (Santa Maria del Fiore). The cart is connected by a rope to the interior of the church. Near the cart there is a model of a dove, which, according to legend, is a symbol of good luck for the city: at the end of the Easter mass, the dove emerges from the nave of the Duomo and ignites the fireworks on the cart.

Calcio Storico[edit]

Calcio Storico
See also: Calcio Fiorentino
Calcio Storico Fiorentino ("Historic Florentine Football"), sometimes called Calcio in costume, is a traditional sport, regarded as a forerunner of soccer, though the actual gameplay most closely resembles rugby. The event originates from the Middle Ages, when the most important Florentine nobles amused themselves playing while wearing bright costumes. The most important match was played on 17 February 1530, during the siege of Florence. That day Papal troops besieged the city while the Florentines, with contempt of the enemies, decided to play the game notwithstanding the situation. The game is played in the Piazza di Santa Croce. A temporary arena is constructed, with bleachers and a sand-covered playing field. A series of matches are held between four teams representing each quartiere (quarter) of Florence during late June and early July.[69] There are four teams: Azzurri (light blue), Bianchi (white), Rossi (red) and Verdi (green). The Azzurri are from the quarter of Santa Croce, Bianchi from the quarter of Santo Spirito, Verdi are from San Giovanni and Rossi from Santa Maria Novella.

Transport[edit]
Ambox current red.svg
This article is outdated. Please update this section to reflect recent events or newly available information. (April 2013)
See also: Trams in Florence

Route map of the tramway

Tramway Sirio in Florence
The principal public transport network within the city is run by the ATAF and Li-nea bus company, with tickets available at local tobacconists, bars and newspaper stalls. Individual tickets, or a pass called the Carta Agile with multiple rides (10, 21 or 35), may be used on ATAF&Li-nea buses, Tramvia, and 2nd class local trains but only within city railway stations. Once on the bus, tickets must be stamped (or swiped for the Carta Agile) using the machines on board, unlike train tickets which must be validated before boarding. The main bus station is next to Santa Maria Novella railway station. Trenitalia runs trains between the railway stations within the city, and to other destinations around Italy and Europe. The central railway station, Santa Maria Novella railway station, is located about 500 metres (1,600 ft) northwest of the Piazza del Duomo. There are two other important stations: Campo Di Marte and Rifredi. Most bundled routes are FirenzePisa, FirenzeViareggio and Firenze-Arezzo (along the main line to Rome). Other local railways connect Florence with Borgo San Lorenzo in the Mugello area (Faentina railway) and Siena.

Long distance 10 km (6.21 mi) buses are run by the SITA, Copit, CAP companies. The transit companies also accommodate travellers from the Amerigo Vespucci Airport, which is five kilometres (3.1 miles) west of the city centre, and which has scheduled services run by major European carriers.

The centre of the city is closed to through-traffic, although buses, taxis and residents with appropriate permits are allowed in. This area is commonly referred to as the ZTL (Zona Traffico Limitato), which is divided into five subsections.[citation needed] Residents of one section, therefore, will only be able to drive in their district and perhaps some surrounding ones. Cars without permits are allowed to enter after 7.30 pm, or before 7.30 am. The rules shift during the tourist-filled summers, putting more restrictions on where one can get in and out.

In an effort to reduce air pollution and car traffic in the city, a multi-line tram network called Tramvia is under construction. The first line began operation on 14 February 2010 and connects Florence's primary intercity railway station (Santa Maria Novella) with the southwestern suburb of Scandicci. This line is 7.4 km (4.6 mi) long and has 14 stops. The construction of a second line began on 5 November 2011, construction was stopped due to contractors' difficulties but should restart in a few months, completion is now previewed in 2017. This second line will connect Florence's airport with the city centre. A third line (from Santa Maria Novella to the Careggi area, where are the most important hospitals of Florence) has gained governmental approval, its construction will follow the second line's timeline.[70][71][72]

Railway station[edit]
Firenze Santa Maria Novella railway station is the main national and international railway station in Florence and is used by 59 million people every year.[73] The building, designed by Giovanni Michelucci, was built in the Italian Rationalism style and it is one of the major rationalist buildings in Italy. It is located in Piazza della Stazione, near the Fortezza da Basso (a masterpiece of the military Renaissance architecture[74]) and the Viali di Circonvallazione, and in front of the Basilica of Santa Maria Novella's apse, from which it takes its name.

A new high-speed rail station is under construction and is contracted to be operational by 2015.[75] It is planned to be connected to Vespucci airport, Santa Maria Novella railway station, and to the city centre by the second line of Tramvia.[76] The architectural firms Foster + Partners and Lancietti Passaleva Giordo and Associates designed this new rail station.[77]

Airport[edit]

Florence Airport
Florence Airport is one of two main airports in the Tuscany region, the other being Galileo Galilei International Airport in Pisa.

Sport[edit]
Florence is represented by ACF Fiorentina, which plays in Serie A, the top league of Italian football. They play their games at the Stadio Artemio Franchi, which currently holds 47,282. The city is home of Coverciano, the main training ground of the Italian national team, and the technical department of the Italian Football Federation.

Florence was selected to host the 2013 UCI World Road Cycling Championships.

International relations[edit]
See also: List of twin towns and sister cities in Italy
Twin towns and sister cities[edit]
Florence is twinned with:[78]

Bethlehem, Palestine[78][79]
Budapest, Hungary[78]
Dresden, Germany[78][80]
Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom[78][81]
Fes, Morocco[78]
Isfahan, Iran[78]
Kassel, Germany[78]
Kiev, Ukraine[78]
Kuwait City, Kuwait[78]
Kyoto, Japan[78][82]
Nanjing, China[78]
Nazareth, Israel[78]
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States[78][83]
Puebla, Mexico[78]
Reims, France[78]
Riga, Latvia[78][84]
Salvador, Brazil[78]
Sydney, Australia[78]
Tirana, Albania[85]
Turku, Finland[78]
Valladolid, Spain[78]
Other partnerships[edit]
Arequipa, Peru[78]
Cannes, France[78]
Gifu, Gifu Japan[78]
Krakw, Poland[78][86]
Malm?, Sweden[78][87]
Mauthausen, Austria[78]
Ningbo, China[78]
Tallinn, Estonia[78]
Porto-Vecchio, Corsica[78]
Providence, Rhode Island, United States[78]
Notable residents[edit]
See also: Category:People from Florence

Niccol Machiavelli

Lorenzo de' Medici

Dante Alighieri
Sir Harold Acton, author and aesthete
John Argyropoulos, scholar
Leone Battista Alberti, polymath
Dante Alighieri, poet
Giovanni Boccaccio, poet
Baldassarre Bonaiuti, 14th-century chronicler
Sandro Botticelli, painter
Aureliano Brandolini, agronomist and development cooperation scholar
Robert Browning and Elizabeth Barrett Browning, 19th-century English poets
Filippo Brunelleschi, architect
Michelangelo Buonarroti, sculptor, painter, author of the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel and David
Francesco Casagrande, cyclist
Roberto Cavalli, fashion designer
Carlo Collodi, writer
Enrico Coveri, fashion designer
Donatello, sculptor
Oriana Fallaci, journalist and author
Salvatore Ferragamo, fashion designer and shoemaker
Mike Francis (musician) born Francesco Puccioni, singer and composer
Silpa Bhirasri (born Corrado Feroci), sculptor, founder of Silpakorn University (University of Art). And also credited as the principal figure of modern art in Thailand.[88]
Frescobaldi Family, notable bankers and wine producers
Galileo Galilei, Italian physicist, astronomer, and philosopher
Giotto, early 14th-century painter, sculptor and architect
Lorenzo Ghiberti, sculptor
Guccio Gucci, founder of the Gucci label
Robert Lowell, poet
Niccol Machiavelli, poet, philosopher and political thinker, author of The Prince and The Discourses
Masaccio, painter
Rose McGowan, Florence-born actress
Medici family
Girolamo Mei, historian and humanist
Antonio Meucci, inventor of the telephone
Florence Nightingale, pioneer of modern nursing, and statistician
Virginia Oldoini, Countess of Castiglione, early photographic artist, secret agent and courtesan
Valerio Profondavalle, Flemish painter
Raphael, painter
Girolamo Savonarola, reformist
Adriana Seroni, politician
Giovanni Spadolini, politician
Antonio Squarcialupi, organist and composer
Evangelista Torricelli, Italian physicist
Giorgio Vasari, painter, architect, and historian
Amerigo Vespucci, explorer and cartographer, namesake of the Americas
Leonardo da Vinci, polymath
Lisa del Giocondo, model of the Mona Lisa.
See also[edit]
	Italy portal
2011 Florence shootings
Category:Buildings and structures in Florence
Chancellor of Florence
Cronaca fiorentina
European University Institute
Florentine School
Historical states of Italy
List of squares in Florence
University of Florence
References[edit]
^ "Bilancio demografico anno 2015 e popolazione residente al 31 dicembre; Comune: Firenze". ISTAT. Select: Italia Centrale/Toscana/Firenze/Firenze.
^ Alternative obsolete form: Fiorenza [fjo?r?ntsa]; Latin: Florentia
^ Bilancio demografico anno 2013, dati ISTAT
^ "Economy of Renaissance Florence, Richard A. Goldthwaite, Book C Barnes & Noble". Search.barnesandnoble.com. 23 April 2009. Retrieved 22 January 2010.
^ Spencer Baynes, L.L.D., and W. Robertson Smith, L.L.D., Encyclop?dia Britannica. Akron, Ohio: The Werner Company, 1907: p.675
^ Brucker, Gene A. (1969). Renaissance Florence. New York: Wiley. p. 23. ISBN 0520046951.
^ "Euromonitor Internationals top city destinations ranking". 27 January 2014.
^ a b c d e f g h i j "Florence (Italy)". Britannica Concise Encyclopedia. Britannica.com. Retrieved 22 January 2010.
^ a b c "FASHION: Italy's Renaissance". TIME. 4 February 1952. Retrieved 9 October 2013.
^ Tim Kiladze (22 January 2010). "World's Most Beautiful Cities". Forbes. Retrieved 12 April 2011.
^ "London Edges New York for Top 2012 Global Fashion Capital". Languagemonitor.com. Retrieved 16 November 2012.
^ "La classifica dei redditi nei comuni capoluogo di provincia". Il Sole 24 ORE. Retrieved 9 October 2013.
^ "History of the Italian Language". italian.about.com. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ http://www.lonelyplanet.com/italy/florence/history
^ Leonardo Bruni, History of the Florentine People I.1, 3
^ "Decameron Web, Boccaccio, Plague". Brown University.
^ Pallanti, Giuseppe (2006). Mona Lisa Revealed: The True Identity of Leonardo's Model. Florence, Italy: Skira. pp. 17, 23, 24. ISBN 88-7624-659-2.
^ "University Study Center, Florence ? The GI University Project". Giuniversity.wordpress.com. Retrieved 16 November 2012.
^ http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-36378289
^ "World map of K?ppen C Geiger Climate Classification". koeppen-geiger.vu-wien.ac.at. April 2006. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ "Clima en Firenze / Peretola Histricos desde 1964 hasta 2016 (METAR)". tutiempo.net (in Spanish). Retrieved 29 May 2016.
^ MeteoAM.it! Il portale Italiano della Meteorologia (20 May 2005). "MeteoAM.it! Il portale Italiano della Meteorologia". Meteoam.it. Archived from the original on 8 October 2006. Retrieved 22 January 2010.
^ "FIRENZE/PERETOLA" (PDF). Servizio Meteorologico. Retrieved 13 October 2012.
^ "World Weather Information Service - Florence". Retrieved 2010-04-14.
^ Ross King, Brunelleschi's Dome, The Story of the great Cathedral of Florence, Penguin, 2001
^ Centre, UNESCO. "Historic Centre of Florence C UNESCO World Heritage Centre". whc.unesco.org. Retrieved 2015-07-08.
^ Miner, Jennifer (2 September 2008). "Florence Art Tours, Florence Museums, Florence Architecture". Travelguide.affordabletours.com. Archived from the original on 29 January 2010. Retrieved 22 January 2010.
^ "Touring Club Italiano C Dossier Musei 2009" (PDF). Retrieved 12 April 2011.
^ "Gruppo Cine Hall". Cinehall.it. Retrieved 19 May 2010.
^ Spruyt, H. (1996). The Sovereign State and Its Competitors: An Analysis of Systems Change. Princeton University Press. p. 132. ISBN 9780691029108. Retrieved 27 October 2014.
^ Bruce, S.G. (2010). Ecologies and Economies in Medieval and Early Modern Europe: Studies in Environmental History for Richard C. Hoffmann. Brill. p. 48. ISBN 9789004180079. Retrieved 27 October 2014.
^ Chant, C.; Goodman, D. (2005). Pre-Industrial Cities and Technology. Taylor & Francis. p. 141. ISBN 9781134636204. Retrieved 27 October 2014.
^ Tellier, L.N. (2009). Urban World History: An Economic and Geographical Perspective. Presses de l'Universite du Quebec. p. 311. ISBN 9782760522091. Retrieved 27 October 2014.
^ "Statistiche demografiche ISTAT". Demo.istat.it. Retrieved 5 May 2009.
^ Chinese immigrants to Italy build no ordinary Chinatown, Chicago Tribune, 1 January 2009 Archived 1 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Statistiche demografiche ISTAT". Demo.istat.it. Retrieved 5 May 2009.
^ "La classifica dei redditi nei comuni capoluogo di provincia". Il Sole 24 ORE. Retrieved 19 May 2010.
^ "The world best cities are...". CNN. Retrieved 17 October 2013.
^ "Florence,Italy:Tourist Travel Guide for Holidays in Florence,Firenze,Italy". www.visitflorence.com. Retrieved 2015-09-28.
^ "Travel + Leisure". Travelandleisure.com. Retrieved 11 June 2011.
^ Tourists spend more than ever before on cultural destinations (for 2004C2005) at Euromonitor International
^ "Study Abroad in Florence Italy C Florentine artisan courses for school groups". Florenceart.net. Retrieved 22 January 2010.
^ ITVnews.tv
^ "Euromonitor International's Top City Destinations Ranking". Euromonitor.com. 12 December 2008. Archived from the original on 11 January 2010. Retrieved 21 March 2010.
^ Oxford Companion to Wine. "Bolgheri".
^ "Art in Florence". learner.org. Retrieved 27 September 2010.
^ "Renaissance Artists". library.thinkquest.org. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ "Uffizi Gallery Florence ? Uffizi Museum ? Ticket Reservation". Virtualuffizi.com. Archived from the original on 18 February 2009. Retrieved 5 May 2009.
^ Peter Barenboim, Sergey Shiyan, Michelangelo: Mysteries of Medici Chapel, SLOVO, Moscow, 2006. ISBN 5-85050-825-2
^ "Palace of Bargello ( Bargello's Palace ), Florence Italy C ItalyGuides.it". ItalyGuides.it. 28 October 2006. Retrieved 5 May 2009.
^ "Inner court of Pitti Palace (Palazzo Pitti), Florence Italy C ItalyGuides.it". ItalyGuides.it. 28 October 2006. Retrieved 5 May 2009.
^ Auxologia: Graziella Magherini: La Sindrome di Stendhal (book) at the Wayback Machine (archived October 12, 2006)[dead link] (excerpts in Italian)
^ "Why Was Florence Considered Important For Culture And Arts? C Essay C Michellekim". StudyMode.com. Retrieved 14 March 2010.
^ "The Duomo of Florence | Tripleman". www.tripleman.com. Retrieved 25 March 2010.
^ "brunelleschi's dome C Brunelleschi's Dome". Brunelleschisdome.com. Retrieved 25 March 2010.
^ "Florence, Tuscany Region, Italy C The Duomo, Statue Of David, Piazza Dell Signoria". Europe.travelonline.com. Retrieved 25 March 2010.
^ "Florence Art Gallery: Art Galleries and Museums in Florence Area, Italy". Florence.world-guides.com. Retrieved 25 March 2010.
^ "Become a friend of Palazzo Strozzi C Fondazione Palazzo Strozzi C Firenze". Palazzostrozzi.org. Archived from the original on 27 July 2011. Retrieved 25 March 2010.
^ a b c d "Literature in Florence, Florentine Writers and Poets". Florenceholidays.com. Retrieved 25 March 2010.
^ a b c d e "Literature in Florence C Petrarch and Boccaccio, Florentine Writers and Poet: Petrarch and Boccaccio". Florenceholidays.com. Retrieved 25 March 2010.
^ 'Frank D'Accone, Lorenzo il Magnifico and Music', in Lorenzo il Magnifico e il suo mondo. Convegno Internazionale di Studi, Firenze, 9C13 giugno 1992, edited by Gian Carlo Garfagnini, 259C290, Istituto Nazionale di Studi sul Rinascimento. Atti di Convegni, XIX (Florence: Olschki, 1994), 260.
^ "A short history of opera" (PDF). sfopera.com. Retrieved 28 September 2010.[dead link]
^ welcometuscany.it. "Tuscany italy tuscany tourists guide, travel tips extra virgin olive oil wines and foods of the most beautiful land in the world". welcometuscany.it. Retrieved 5 May 2009.
^ "Polo Scientifico di Sesto Fiorentino". Polosci.unifi.it. Archived from the original on 18 March 2014. Retrieved 18 March 2014.
^ "Florence CNR Research Area". Area.fi.cnr.it. Archived from the original on 18 March 2014. Retrieved 18 March 2014.
^ Frick, Carole Collier. Dressing Renaissance Florence: Families, Fortunes, and Fine Clothing. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002.
^ "The birth of italian fashion". Gbgiorgini.it. Retrieved 5 May 2009.
^ "Conde Nast Traveller's guide to shopping in Florence". Cntraveller.com. Retrieved 9 October 2013.
^ Calcio Storico Fiorentino (Official site) (Italian)
^ "Arriva La Tramvia (in Italian)". GEST. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
^ "Tramvia C Il Sistema Tramviario Fiorentino". Archived from the original on 2 February 2012. Retrieved 11 December 2011., Tramvia page of Florence's city government web site (in Italian).
^ Trams in Florence, Wikipedia article "Florence tramway"
^ "Grandi Stazioni C Firenze S. Maria Novella". Grandistazioni.it. Retrieved 22 June 2009.
^ "Florence travel information | Holiday apartment near Ducati Museum". city-getaway.com. Retrieved 27 October 2014.
^ "Report Quindiciale N. 17" (PDF). Rete Ferroviaria Italiana. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 May 2012. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
^ "Descrizione Della Linea 2" (PDF). Comune di Firenze. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 May 2012. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
^ "Florence TAV Station". Foster + Partners. Archived from the original on 27 November 2011. Retrieved 11 December 2011.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae "Gemellaggi, Patti di amicizia e di fratellanza" (in Italian). Comune di Firenze. Retrieved 2015-08-28.
^ "Bethlehem Municipality". www.bethlehem-city.org. Archived from the original on 24 July 2010. Retrieved 10 October 2009.
^ "Dresden C Partner Cities". Landeshauptstadt Dresden. Archived from the original on 16 October 2008. Retrieved 29 December 2008.
^ "Twin and Partner Cities". City of Edinburgh Council. Archived from the original on 14 June 2012. Retrieved 16 January 2009.
^ "Sister Cities of Kyoto City". City of Kyoto. Archived from the original on 21 January 2014. Retrieved 21 January 2014.
^ "Florence, Italy". Ivc.org. Retrieved 26 June 2009.
^ "Twin cities of Riga". Riga City Council. Retrieved 27 July 2009.
^ "Twinning Cities: International Relations (NB Florence is listed as 'Firenze')" (PDF). Municipality of Tirana. www.tirana.gov.al. Retrieved 23 June 2009.
^ "Krakw C Miasta Partnerskie" [Krakw -Partnership Cities]. Miejska Platforma Internetowa Magiczny Krakw (in Polish). Archived from the original on 2 July 2013. Retrieved 10 August 2013.
^ "V?norter" (in Swedish). Malm? stad. Retrieved 6 November 2013.
^ "Special Note : Professor Silpa Bhirasris Life and Works". journal.su.ac.th. Retrieved 27 October 2014.
Sources[edit]
Niccol Machiavelli. Florentine Histories
Brucker, Gene A. (1983). Renaissance Florence.
Brucker, Gene A. (1971). The Society of Renaissance Florence: A Documentary Study.
Chamberlin, Russell (22 May 2008). Travellers Florence & Tuscany, 3rd: Guides to Destinations Worldwide. Thomas Cook Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84157-844-6. Retrieved 11 March 2010.
Chaney, Edward (2003), A Traveller's Companion to Florence.
Goldthwaite, Richard A. (1982). The Building of Renaissance Florence: An Economic and Social History.
Hibbert, Christopher (1999). The House of Medici: Its Rise and Fall.
Lewis, R.W.B. (1996). The City of Florence: Historical Vistas and Personal Sightings.
Najemy, John (2006). A History of Florence 1200C1575.
Schevill, Ferdinand (1936). History of Florence: From the Founding of the City Through the Renaissance.
Trexler, Richard C. (1991). Public Life in Renaissance Florence.
Ferdinand Schevill, History of Florence: From the Founding of the City Through the Renaissance (Frederick Ungar, 1936) is the standard overall history of Florence.
Sciacca, Christine (2012). Florence at the Dawn of the Renaissance: Painting and Illumination, 1300C1500. Getty Publications. ISBN 978-1-60606-126-8. Retrieved 2016-02-12.
External links[edit]
Find more about
Florence
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Search Wiktionary	Definitions from Wiktionary
Search Commons	Media from Commons
Search Wikinews	News from Wikinews
Search Wikiquote	Quotations from Wikiquote
Search Wikisource	Texts from Wikisource
Search Wikibooks	Textbooks from Wikibooks
Search Wikivoyage	Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Search Wikiversity	Learning resources from Wikiversity
Florence Art Museums
The High Renaissance in Florence C Video
UNESCO video


v t e
Tourism in Florence
Religious sites	
Basilicas
Cathedral of Santa Maria del Fiore S Lorenzo Medici Chapel S Croce Baroncelli and Pazzi Chapels S Maria Novella Tornabuoni Chapel SS Annunziata S Marco S Miniato al Monte S Maria del Carmine Brancacci Chapel S Trinita Bartolini Salimbeni Chapel Sassetti Chapel S Spirito
Churches
Badia Fiorentina Battistero di San Giovanni S Mary of the Angels Certosa Orsanmichele Ognissanti Oratorio dei Vanchetoni Oratory of Ges Pellegrino Oratory of S Thomas Aquinas San Frediano in Cestello S Gaetano S Giovannino degli Scolopi S Giovannino dei Cavalieri S Jacopo sopr'Arno S Salvatore al Vescovo S Ambrogio S Felicita Santa Maria Maddalena dei Pazzi S Maria Maggiore S Martino del Vescovo Ss Apostoli S Pancrazio S Salvi Ss Simone e Giuda S Stefano al Ponte
Other
Great Synagogue
FlorenceCoA.svg
Museums, galleries
and palaces	
Bargello Casa Buonarroti Casa Guidi Galleria dell'Accademia David Loggia del Bigallo Loggia del Mercato Nuovo Loggia del Pesce Loggia Rucellai Museo dell'Opera del Duomo Museo Galileo Museo Nazionale Alinari della Fotografia Museo Nazionale di San Marco Museo di Storia Naturale di Firenze La Specola National Archaeological Museum Orsanmichele Ospedale degli Innocenti Palazzo dell'Arte dei Beccai Palazzo Davanzati Palazzo Gondi Palazzo Medici Riccardi Magi Chapel Palazzo Pitti Museo delle Porcellane Palazzo Vecchio Studiolo of Francesco I Palazzo Spini Feroni Stibbert Museum Uffizi Loggia dei Lanzi Vasari Corridor
Towers (Torri)	
degli Amidei Giotto's Campanile degli Alberti dei Della Bella dei Gianfigliazzi dei Mannelli dei Pulci
Library	
Biblioteca Riccardiana at Palazzo Medici Riccardi British Institute of Florence Gabinetto Vieusseux (Palazzo Strozzi) Kunsthistorisches Institut Laurentian Library National Central Library
Landmarks	
Fountain of Neptune Giotto's Campanile Ponte Vecchio Monument to Dante
Theatres	
Teatro Comunale Florence Teatro della Pergola Teatro Verdi
Squares	
Squares of Florence Piazza del Duomo Piazza della Repubblica Piazza Santa Croce Piazza della Signoria
Streets	
Via Cavour Via de' Tornabuoni
Fort	
Belvedere Fortezza da Basso
Gardens and parks	
Boboli Gardens Giardino Bardini Giardino dell'Iris Giardino delle rose Orto Botanico di Firenze Parco delle Cascine
Villas	
Medici villas di Castello La Petraia di Careggi Medicea L'Ambrogiana del Poggio Imperiale Gamberaia I Tatti Il Gioiello La Pietra Rusciano
Events and traditions	
Calcio Fiorentino Maggio Musicale Fiorentino Scoppio del carro
Districts of Florence Trams in Florence
v t e
Regional capitals of Italy
   	
L'Aquila, Abruzzo
Aosta, Aosta Valley
Bari, Apulia
Potenza, Basilicata

Catanzaro, Calabria
Naples, Campania
Bologna, Emilia-Romagna
Trieste, Friuli-Venezia Giulia

Rome, Lazio
Genoa, Liguria
Milan, Lombardy
Ancona, Marche

Campobasso, Molise
Turin, Piedmont
Cagliari, Sardinia
Palermo, Sicily

Trento, Trentino-Alto Adige/Sdtirol
Florence, Tuscany
Perugia, Umbria
Venice, Veneto

v t e
World Heritage Sites in Italy
Northwest	
Crespi d'Adda Genoa Mantua and Sabbioneta Monte San Giorgio1 Porto Venere, Palmaria, Tino and Tinetto, Cinque Terre Corniglia Manarola Monterosso al Mare Riomaggiore Vernazza Residences of the Royal House of Savoy Castle of Moncalieri Castle of Racconigi Castle of Rivoli Castello del Valentino Royal Palace of Turin Palazzo Carignano Palazzo Madama, Turin Palace of Venaria Palazzina di caccia of Stupinigi Villa della Regina Rhaetian Railway in the Albula / Bernina Landscapes1 Rock Drawings in Valcamonica Sacri Monti of Piedmont and Lombardy Santa Maria delle Grazie, Milan Vineyard Landscape of Piedmont: Langhe-Roero and Monferrato
Spanish Steps, Rome
Castel del Monte
The Last Supper by Leonardo da Vinci in the Church of Santa Maria delle Grazie, Milan
Royal Palace of Caserta
Venice
Palermo Arab-Norman
Northeast	
Aquileia The Dolomites Ferrara Modena Cathedral, Torre della Ghirlandina and Piazza Grande, Modena Orto botanico di Padova Ravenna Venice Verona City of Vicenza and the Palladian Villas of the Veneto
Central	
Assisi Basilica of Saint Francis of Assisi Etruscan Necropolises of Cerveteri and Tarquinia Florence Hadrian's Villa Medici villas Piazza del Duomo, Pisa Pienza Rome2 San Gimignano Siena Urbino Val d'Orcia Villa d'Este
South	
Alberobello Amalfi Coast Castel del Monte, Apulia Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park, Paestum and Velia, Certosa di Padula Herculaneum Oplontisand Villa Poppaea Naples Palace of Caserta, Aqueduct of Vanvitelli and San Leucio Complex Pompeii Sassi of Matera
Islands	
Aeolian Islands Arab-Norman Palermo and the Cathedral Churches of Cefal and Monreale Archaeological Area of Agrigento Barumini nuraghes Mount Etna Syracuse and Necropolis of Pantalica Val di Noto Caltagirone Catania Militello in Val di Catania Modica Noto Palazzolo Acreide Ragusa Scicli Villa Romana del Casale
Nationwide	
Longobards in Italy, Places of Power (568C774 A.D.) Brescia Cividale del Friuli Castelseprio Spoleto Temple of Clitumnus located at Campello sul Clitunno Santa Sofia located at Benevento Sanctuary of Monte Sant'Angelo located at Monte Sant'Angelo Prehistoric pile dwellings around the Alps3
1 Shared with Switzerland 2 Shared with the Holy See 3 Shared with Austria, France, Germany, Slovenia, and Switzerland
v t e
European Capitals of Culture
1985 Athens 1986 Florence 1987 Amsterdam 1988 West Berlin 1989 Paris 1990 Glasgow 1991 Dublin 1992 Madrid 1993 Antwerp 1994 Lisbon 1995 Luxembourg City 1996 Copenhagen 1997 Thessaloniki 1998 Stockholm 1999 Weimar 2000 Reykjavk Bergen Helsinki Brussels Prague Krakw Santiago de Compostela Avignon Bologna 2001 Rotterdam Porto 2002 Bruges Salamanca 2003 Graz Plovdiv 2004 Genoa Lille 2005 Cork 2006 Patras 2007 Luxembourg City and Greater Region Sibiu 2008 Liverpool Stavanger 2009 Linz Vilnius 2010 Ruhr Istanbul Pcs 2011 Turku Tallinn 2012 Maribor Guimar?es 2013 Ko?ice Marseille 2014 Ume? Riga 2015 Mons Plze 2016 San Sebastin Wroc?aw 2017 Aarhus Paphos 2018 Valletta Leeuwarden 2019 Plovdiv Matera 2020 Rijeka Galway
v t e
Comuni of the Metropolitan City of Florence
Bagno a Ripoli Barberino Val d'Elsa Barberino di Mugello Borgo San Lorenzo Calenzano Campi Bisenzio Capraia e Limite Castelfiorentino Cerreto Guidi Certaldo Dicomano Empoli Fiesole Figline Valdarno Firenzuola Florence Fucecchio Gambassi Terme Greve in Chianti Impruneta Incisa in Val d'Arno Lastra a Signa Londa Marradi Montaione Montelupo Fiorentino Montespertoli Palazzuolo sul Senio Pelago Pontassieve Reggello Rignano sull'Arno Rufina San Casciano in Val di Pesa San Godenzo Scandicci Scarperia e San Piero Sesto Fiorentino Signa Tavarnelle Val di Pesa Vaglia Vicchio Vinci
v t e
Cities in Italy by population
1,000,000+	
Milan Rome
500,000+	
Genoa Naples Palermo Turin
200,000+	
Bari Bologna Catania Florence Messina Padua Taranto Trieste Venice Verona
100,000+	
Ancona Andria Arezzo Bergamo Bolzano Brescia Cagliari Ferrara Foggia Forl Giugliano Latina Livorno Modena Monza Novara Parma Perugia Pescara Piacenza Prato Ravenna Reggio Calabria Reggio Emilia Rimini Salerno Sassari Syracuse Terni Trento Udine Vicenza
complete list
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 148617654 GND: 4017581-9 BNF: cb11931414h (data) NDL: 00629096
Categories: Cities and towns in TuscanyCommunes of the Province of FlorenceFlorenceFormer capitals of ItalyFormer national capitals50s BC establishments59 BCUniversity towns in Italy
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search
SearchGo
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikivoyage
Languages
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
????
?nglisc
???????
Aragons
Asturianu
Aymar aru
Az?rbaycanca
?????
Ban-lam-g

 (?)?
Bikol Central

Boarisch
???????
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Catal
Cebuano
?e?tina
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
?
Emilin e rumagnl
Espa?ol
Esperanto
Estreme?u
Euskara
?????
Fran?ais
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gidhlig
Galego
Z/Hak-ka-ng?
???
???????
??????
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue

slenska
Italiano
?????
Basa Jawa
Kapampangan
???????
??
Kernowek
Kiswahili


Latina
Latvie?u
L?tzebuergesch
Lietuvi?
Ligure
Limburgs
Lumbaart
Magyar

??????
?????
????
????????
Bahasa Melayu

Nhuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
??????
????? ????
Z
Napulitano

Nordfriisk
Norsk bokm?l
Norsk nynorsk
Occitan
 
O?zbekcha/?
??????
??????
Piemontis
Plattdtsch
Polski
Portugus
Qaraqalpaqsha
Roman?
Runa Simi

?????????
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Sloven?ina
Sloven??ina
?l?nski
 / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / 
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
?????
Tarandne
/tatar?a
??????
???
Trk?e
Twi
?
????
???????? / Uyghurche
Vneto
Veps?n kel
Ti?ng Vi?t
Volapk
West-Vlams
Winaray
??????
Z
?emait??ka

Edit links
This page was last modified on 27 July 2016, at 08:57.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
 Page semi-protected
Assassin's Creed
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Abstergo)
This article is about the series. For the first game in the series, see Assassin's Creed (video game). For the book series, see Assassin's Creed (book series). For the upcoming film, see Assassin's Creed (film).
Assassin's Creed
Assassin's Creed Logo.svg
Genres	
Action-adventure
Stealth
Developers	
Ubisoft Montreal
Ubisoft Annecy
Ubisoft Sofia
Ubisoft Milan
Ubisoft Quebec
Ubisoft Toronto
Gameloft
Griptonite Games
Ubisoft Blue Byte
Publishers	Ubisoft
Creators	
Patrice Dsilets
Jade Raymond
Corey May
First release	Assassin's Creed
November 13, 2007
Latest release	Assassin's Creed Chronicles: Russia
February 9, 2016
Assassin's Creed is an action-adventure video game series created by Ubisoft that consists of nine main games and a number of supporting materials. The games have appeared on the PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Microsoft Windows, OS X, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, PlayStation Vita, iOS, HP webOS,[1] Android, Nokia Symbian Windows Phone platforms, and the Wii U.

The games are set in a fictional history of real world events and follows the centuries-old struggle between the Assassins, who fight for peace with free will, and the Templars, who desire peace through control. The main games in the franchise were developed by Ubisoft Montreal for the single player and Ubisoft Annecy for the multiplayer, with the handheld titles developed by Gameloft and Gryptonite Studios, with additional development by Ubisoft Montreal. The series has been well received by the public and critics, and has sold over 73 million copies as of April 2014, becoming Ubisoft's best selling franchise.[2] The series took inspiration from the novel Alamut by the Slovenian writer Vladimir Bartol,[3] while building upon concepts from the Prince of Persia series.[4]

Contents  [hide] 
1	Premise
2	Gameplay
3	Release history
4	Main series
4.1	Assassin's Creed
4.2	Assassin's Creed II
4.3	Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood
4.4	Assassin's Creed: Revelations
4.5	Assassin's Creed III
4.6	Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag
4.7	Assassin's Creed Rogue
4.8	Assassin's Creed Unity
4.9	Assassin's Creed Syndicate
5	Other games
5.1	Assassin's Creed: Alta?r's Chronicles
5.2	Assassin's Creed: Bloodlines
5.3	Assassin's Creed II: Discovery
5.4	Assassin's Creed: Project Legacy
5.5	Assassin's Creed: Recollection
5.6	Assassin's Creed: Multiplayer Rearmed
5.7	Assassin's Creed III: Liberation
5.8	Assassin's Creed: Pirates
5.9	Assassin's Creed Memories
5.10	Assassin's Creed Chronicles
5.11	Assassin's Creed Identity
6	Cancelled games
6.1	Assassin's Creed: Lost Legacy
6.2	Assassin's Creed: Utopia
7	Future
8	Other media
8.1	Comics
8.2	Films
8.3	Novels
8.4	Books
8.5	In other media
9	Reception
10	References
11	External links
Premise
The Assassin's Creed games primarily revolve around the rivalry between two ancient secret societies: the Assassins and the Knights Templar, and their indirect relation to an ancient species pre-dating humanity, whose society, along with much of Earth's biosphere, was destroyed by a massive solar storm. The games' real-world chronological setting begins in the year 2012, and features Desmond Miles, a bartender who is a descendant of several lines of prominent Assassins; though raised as an Assassin, he left his nomadic family to seek out a more common lifestyle. He is initially kidnapped by the megacorporation Abstergo Industries, the modern-day face of the Knights Templar, who are aware of Desmond's ancestral lineage. Desmond is forced to use the "Animus", a device that allows him to experience his "ancestral memories". Abstergo is seeking to discover the location of several artifacts, or the "Pieces of Eden", that hold great power, to control mankind and alter its fate, bringing humanity into one single unified group. Desmond also encounters a small team of modern-day Assassins; agreeing to work with them, Desmond uses their version of the Animus (the Animus 2.0) to continue to experience the memories of his ancestors to discover the locations of additional Pieces of Eden so they can be recovered before Abstergo can do so. While experiencing these memories, some of their abilities are genetically leaked into Desmond, known as the Bleeding Effect, giving him some of the Assassin skills of his predecessors at the cost of living with multiple sets of memories and personalities in his mind.

Within the Animus, Desmond explores the memories of a number of Assassins, including Alta?r Ibn-La'Ahad, an initially disgraced Assassin working to redeem himself during the Third Crusade; Ezio Auditore da Firenze, an Assassin in Italy during the late 15th and early 16th centuries of the Italian Renaissance, and Ratohnhak:ton, otherwise known as Connor, a half-Mohawk, half-British Assassin during the American Revolution. Throughout these events, Desmond learns of allusions to the prophetic end of the world in 2012 from a former Animus test subject, Subject 16: the event turns out to be a repeat of the disaster which wiped out the ancient civilization, and he finds out that his memories hold the key to Earth's surviving the second storm. During his experiences, Desmond is aided by holographic projections of three of the ancient race's rulers: Jupiter, Minerva, and Juno. After Desmond dies to ensure Earth's survival, his memories, which have survived in cyberspace,[5] are accessed by Abstergo, which hires a new subject to enter the Animus. The new subject relives the memories of Edward Kenway, Ratohnhak:ton's grandfather and a privateer-turned-pirate during the British colonial years.[6]

Gameplay
While the game is presented through protagonist Desmond Miles, the bulk of the game is played as Desmond experiences the memories of his ancestors through an advanced device called the Animus. This provides a means of a diegetic interface, showing Desmond's ancestor's health, equipment, goals, and other features as part of the Animus interface. The Animus is based on the player controlling the assassin to maintain the synchronization between Desmond and his ancestor's memories. Performing actions that go against the Assassin's way or dying breaks the synchronization, effectively requiring the player to restart at a previous checkpoint. Furthermore, the player cannot explore outside areas that the assassin has not experienced yet. There are also abnormalities within the Animus from previous users of the device.

While playing as the Assassin characters, the games are generally presented as third-person in an open world, focusing on stealth and free-running. The games use a mission structure to follow the main story, generally assigning the player to complete an assassination of public figureheads or a covert mission. Alternatively, several side missions are available, such as mapping out the expansive cities from a high perch followed by performing a "leap of faith" into a haystack below, collecting treasures hidden across the cities, exploring ruins for relics, building a brotherhood of assassins to perform other tasks, or funding the rebuilding of a city through purchasing and upgrading of shops and other features. At times, the player is in direct control of Desmond, who by nature of the Animus use has learned Assassin techniques through the bleeding effect, as well as their genetic ability of Eagle Vision, which separates friend, foe and assassination targets by illuminating people in different colors. Through the Animus interface, the player can go back to retry any past mission already completed; for example, in Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood, the player achieves better synchronization results by performing the mission in a specific manner such as by only killing the mission's target.

The games use the concept of "active" versus "passive" moves, with "active" moves, such as running, climbing the sides of buildings, or jumping between rooftops, more likely to alert the attention of nearby guards. When the guards become alerted, the player must either fight them or break their line of sight and locate a hiding place, such as a haystack or a well, and wait until the guards' alert is reduced. The combat system allows for a number of unique weapons, armor, and moves, including the use of a hidden blade set in a bracer on the Assassin's arm, and which also can be used to quietly assassinate targets.

Release history
Games, by year and platform.
Bold title denotes part of the main series.
Time period	Title	Year	Consoles	Computers	Handhelds	Mobile	Other
Third Crusade	Assassin's Creed	2007	PlayStation 3, Xbox 360	Windows			
Assassin's Creed: Alta?r's Chronicles	2008			Nintendo DS	Android, iOS, Symbian, webOS, Windows Phone	
Assassin's Creed: Bloodlines	2009			PlayStation Portable		
Renaissance	Assassin's Creed II	PlayStation 3, Xbox 360	OS X, Windows		Symbian	OnLive
Assassin's Creed II: Discovery			Nintendo DS	iOS	
Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood	2010	PlayStation 3, Xbox 360	OS X, Windows		Symbian	OnLive
Assassin's Creed: Revelations	2011	Windows		Android, Symbian
Colonial era	Assassin's Creed III	2012	PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii U		Symbian	
Assassin's Creed III: Liberation[a]	PlayStation 3, Xbox 360	PlayStation Vita		
Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag	2013	PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii U, PlayStation 4, Xbox One			
Assassin's Creed Rogue	2014	PlayStation 3, Xbox 360			
Assassin's Creed Identity				Android, iOS	
French Revolution	Assassin's Creed Unity	PlayStation 4, Xbox One	Windows			
Imperial China	Assassin's Creed Chronicles: China[b]	2015	PlayStation Vita[c]		
Victorian era	Assassin's Creed Syndicate			
Sikh Empire	Assassin's Creed Chronicles: India	2016	PlayStation Vita[c]		
October Revolution	Assassin's Creed Chronicles: Russia		
Notes
Jump up ^ Released under the title Assassin's Creed: Liberation HD for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360.
Jump up ^ Originally announced as part of the season pass for Assassin's Creed Unity.
^ Jump up to: a b Released as a compilation titled Assassin's Creed Chronicles Trilogy Pack.
Main series
Assassin's Creed
Main article: Assassin's Creed (video game)
Desmond is captured by Abstergo and forced to use a machine called the Animus to explore Alta?r ibn-La'Ahad's memories during the time of the Third Crusade. Desmond begins to witness events after Alta?r breaks all three tenets of the Assassin Brotherhood while attempting to stop Robert de Sabl from taking a Piece of Eden. Al Mualim, the Brotherhood's leader, demotes Alta?r to Novice and tasks him with assassinating the nine Knights Templars, including de Sabl, to regain his former status. Alta?r's quest eventually leads him to face de Sabl in the presence of King Richard I of England warning the King of de Sabl's plot to kill him. Alta?r defeats de Sabl, but with his last words, de Sabl reveals that there were ten Templars, the last being Al Mualim, who now holds the Piece of Eden. Alta?r returns to face Al Mualim, struggling to fight through the illusions created by the Piece, but eventually kills Al Mualim. When Alta?r recovers the piece, heand those watching the Animuswitness a holographic map showing locations across the globe where other artifacts are located. Desmond is pulled from the Animus, and was going to be killed, but his life is spared by Lucy Stillman, an Assassin working as a mole within Abstergo, as she claims they might need to further examine his memories later. He comes to learn that a former test subject had left messages only Desmond can see, foretelling of the end of the world in 2012.

The first Assassin's Creed introduced elements that would remain cornerstones of the rest of the series. The game attempts to create historical versions of Masyaf (the Brotherhood's location), Jerusalem, Acre and Damascus, and incorporates a number of documented historical figures into the story. The virtualized Animus system, free running, climbing, stealth, and parkour elements were all present in this title, as well as the initial formulation of the combat system. The player would have to complete a number of side quests before they would be able to obtain an assassin quest from a local Brotherhood guidemaster in each city, though future games would abandon this prerequisite.

Assassin's Creed II
Main article: Assassin's Creed II
Lucy returns and breaks Desmond out of Abstergo, taking him to an Assassin safehouse and introduced to Shaun, a historian, and Rebecca, their technical support. Using an improved version of the Animus, Desmond takes witness to Ezio Auditore da Firenze, a young nobleman from the late 15th Century in Florence, shortly before the execution of Ezio's father and brothers by order of a corrupt official working for the Templars. He and his mother and sister take to hiding at the Monteriggioni villa owned by his uncle Mario, who helps to train Ezio in the ways of an Assassin. Ezio and Mario discover that Rodrigo Borgia is the figurehead of a number of Templars all who were accomplices in the execution of his family, and with help of allies like Leonardo da Vinci, methodically assassinate the lower-ranked Templars, while learning that Borgia has acquired a Piece of Eden called the Apple. Eventually, Ezio corners Borgia, who hands over the Piece and flees; Ezio is inducted into the ranks of the Brotherhood and believed to be a prophet based on their codex. A decade later, the Brotherhood learns that Borgia has since become Pope Alexander VI, using the Church's influence to strengthen the Templars. Ezio invades Vatican City and confronts Borgia, discovering that the Papal staff is also a Piece of Eden. Defeating Borgia but sparing his life, Ezio uses both the Apple and the Papal staff to reveal a chamber of ancient technology. Inside, he is addressed by a hologram of a humanoid female that calls herself Minerva who speaks directly to Desmond through Ezio. Minerva explains how her society had pre-dated humanity's, but a great disaster nearly wiped them out, and warns that another event is due to occur soon, putting the fate of humanity in Desmond's hands. At this discovery, Desmond and his allies find the safehouse has been compromised by Abstergo and flee.

Similar to the first game, Assassin's Creed takes place in historical recreations of Venice, Florence, Forl, San Gimignano, and the Tuscan countryside, and incorporates events during that period as part of the story. Missions are divided into main story missions, themselves divided into memory sequences reflected points along Ezio's life, and side missions which can be accomplished at any time; this approach to mission structure remains consistent in the other games in the series. The Monteriggioni villa provides several functions which can be expanded on by paying money for upgrades of surrounding buildings, or by purchasing artwork, weapons, and costumes for the villa; in turn, the villa will generate wealth for the player at a rate influenced by the upgrades and acquisition of these items. Additional quests involve locating secret Assassin seals, and finding hidden marks left by "Subject 16", a former Animus user, that hint at the nature of Minerva's society.

Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood
Main article: Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood
Desmond and his allies retreat to the ruins of the Monteriggioni villa, and Desmond reenters the Animus to continue Ezio's memories, specifically to identify the location of the Apple. After facing against Rodrigo Borgia, Ezio returned to Monteriggioni, but the villa is soon attacked by forces under the command of Cesare Borgia, Rodrigo's son. Mario is killed and the Apple is stolen. Ezio vows revenge by helping to free the people of Rome from the Borgia family. As Ezio works covertly to turn the city against the Borgias, he gains followers that want to join his cause, and Ezio trains them in the way of the Assassins. In an attempt to assassinate Cesare and Rodrigo at the Castel Sant'Angelo, Ezio instead witnesses Cesare forcing his father to eat a poisoned apple that Rodrigo had prepared to kill his son. Ezio chases down Cesare and eventually captures him and recovers the Apple. Cesare is taken to prison in Viana, Spain but manages to escape with help of his allies. The Assassins lead the fight against Cesare and the remaining loyal Borgia troops, and eventually Ezio throws Cesare from the castle walls, killing him. With no perceived further threats, Ezio takes to hide the Apple under the Colosseum. In the present, Desmond is able to navigate through the underground chambers beneath the Colosseum to locate the Apple. As he picks it up, Desmond is witness to another hologram figure, calling herself Juno, and who controls Desmond to stab Lucy (because Lucy has defected to the Templars) before he falls into a coma.

Brotherhood shares many of the same features as the previous game though it takes place primarily in Rome. Similar to the villa, the player is able to spend money to buy and upgrade shops and other facilities throughout the city as to increase revenue they can collect from it; however, the player will be required to destroy Borgia towers that control various sections of the city before they can do so. The Brotherhood of Assassins is introduced, by which, after saving citizens from certain events, the player can invite these citizens as Assassins; they can then be dispatched to remote locations across Europe to gain experience and money, or can be called in to help the player directly in a mission. For the first time in the series, the game features online multiplayer. Players play as Abstergo employees, who, through the use of the Animus, take on the genetic memories of Renaissance Templars in various game modes.[7]

Assassin's Creed: Revelations
Main article: Assassin's Creed: Revelations
Desmond comes to consciousness in a virtual area within the Animus, the Animus Island, where he meets the digital personality of Subject 16. Subject 16 explains that from the trauma of stabbing Lucy, Desmond must complete the memories of both Alta?r and Ezio to be able to separate his mind from theirs and to allow him to come out of his coma; however, doing so will destabilize the island as the Animus recovers that memory segment and at one point Subject 16 sacrifices himself to allow Desmond to continue. Desmond rejoins Ezio's story many years after Brotherhood, where Ezio is curious to the Assassin's origins and has traveled to Masyaf to locate their original headquarters. He finds Alta?r's library, though it is locked by five keys which the Templars are also seeking, believing there to be great power within it. Ezio travels to the Ottoman-era Constantinople where the keys are said to have been hidden by explorer Niccol Polo, and finds the city embroiled by the feuding brothers Selim and Ahmet vying for the Sultanate, the Templars secretly behind the battle. While searching for the keys, Ezio meets and falls in love with Sofia Sartor. Eventually, Ahmet is revealed as the agent for the Templars, and is killed by Selim, who thanks Ezio for his help but banishes him from the city for his own good.

Ezio - and through him, Desmond - uses the keys to witness Alta?r's memories following the death of Al Mualim. These show Alta?r having lost his wife and youngest son in the midst of a coup d'etat within the Assassins followed by a twenty-year self-imposed exile. Eventually, Alta?r returned to Masyaf, killed the usurper, and retook control. Near death, Alta?r inscribed the keys with his memories and gave them to his friend Niccol to hide at a distant location, before disappearing into his library forever. In Ezio's present, he and Sofia go to Masyaf and open the library to find Alta?r's corpse and the Piece of Eden he possessed. Ezio leaves the Piece as well as his assassin tools, and speaks directly to Desmond, knowing he was only a conduit for him, and hopes he finds the answer he needs. Desmond is then approached by another holographic figure, Jupiter, who explains that their society had tried to use technology to stop the destruction of the earth's surface by a massive solar flare but failed, but they had stored their repository of knowledge in several vaults linked to a central vault which Desmond must use to stop another similar flare that will occur soon; Desmond recognizes the location in New England. Desmond wakes up from his coma, finding Rebecca, Shaun, and to his surprise, his father William, there. After learning that Lucy died from his stabbing, he informs of the location in New York, the Temple that will save humanity.

Revelations includes many new systems, including additional weapons. Bomb-crafting is now available, allowing the player to create explosive, distraction and tactical bombs, using materials found throughout the world and on Assassin's Guild missions. As the player progresses through, Ezio can train new recruits to defend "dens" (Assassin HQs) and an upgraded Assassin's missions section called "Mediterranean Defense" in which the player works to strip control of various cities from Templar hands. The hookblade is also introduced, which can be used in free-running (to travel along zip wires and climb more easily) and in combat (to manipulate enemies). Eagle Vision has been upgraded to Eagle Sense, which allows Ezio to not only see where his enemies and targets are but where they have been and where they are going to be. The multiplayer mode returns in Revelations, this time with more characters, modes, and maps, and by advancing up through levels of experience, the player learns more about Abstergo's history.

Assassin's Creed III
Main article: Assassin's Creed III
Desmond and his allies arrive at the Temple entrance in a cave in the New York area on October 31, 2012, and open its door using the Apple Of Eden, discovering a larger chamber of Precursor technology behind it, including another door requiring a key. Desmond suddenly falls into a fugue state, and is put into the Animus. There, he experiences the memories of a half Mohawk, half British man named Ratonhnhak:ton (/?r?du?n?h?e?du?n/; "Ra-doon-ha-kay-doon"),[8] later dubbed Connor (Achilles calls him this in memory of his dead son), who lived through the American Revolution, as well as Connor's father, Haytham Kenway, who is later revealed as a British agent of the Templars. Kenway had gone to the Colonies in America with a stolen medallion, recruited Templar allies including Charles Lee, and worked to gain the trust of the Mohawk people to get them to show him the location of the Temple, but to his annoyance, the medallion did not open the Temple for him. Connor, as a young boy, witnesses Lee and his troops set fire to his village, killing his mother; years later, he is shown a Piece of Eden, through which Juno speaks to him and instructs him to get training from Master Assassin Achilles Davenport. Achilles takes Connor and teaches him about Assassins and introduces him to Patriots in the Revolution, through which Connor stops several Templar plans to disrupt their efforts including an assassination attempt against George Washington. During these memories, Desmond does recover from the fugue state, and helps his allies to recover power sources to power the Temple scattered about the globe, including one held by Abstergo.

Connor eventually encounters his father, but Kenway offers a cease fire, as he is also after Benjamin Church for usurping his authority. During their investigation, Kenway warns Connor that the Patriots, worried of the allegiance of the various tribes to the British, are seeking to remove Connor's people from their lands. Connor eventually hunts Lee down and kills him, taking the medallion and ending the Templar threat. He is despondent to find his tribe's village abandoned save for the Piece of Eden; through it, Juno tells him to hide the amulet. As December 21 approaches and signs of the solar flare begin to ensue, Desmond and his allies find the buried medallion, and use it at the inner Temple door, behind which is a control sphere. Juno appears and encourages Desmond to touch it, but Minerva appears and warns him to stop it, warning that this will release Juno as an entity that may protect against the solar flare but will be a threat to mankind in the future. Juno counters, explaining that Minerva would rather have most of humanity wiped out, with Desmond safe in the Temple to emerge as a religious figure to lead the survivors but ultimately leading into conflict. Desmond opts to release Juno, believing humanity will have a better chance fighting Juno. As his body is wracked by energy from the control sphere, an aurora surrounds the Earth and protects it from the solar flare. Juno tells the now fallen Desmond that his work is now done, and now it is time for her to do her work.

Assassin's Creed III is structured similarly to the previous games, with missions taking place on an open-world map based on Colonial Boston and New York, and offers a large wilderness area, the Frontier and in the Davenport Homestead, where the player can hunt animals for materials, which then subsequently can be used to construct goods to be traded and sold throughout the colonies. Naval battles were introduced, wherein the player must steer a warship named Aquila in dangerous waters and perform ship-to-ship combat with cannons and mounted guns. In Assassin's Creed III there are a large assortment of mini missions to play and many different outfits to purchase as the player progresses through the game. The modern-day aspects of the story were also significantly expanded, and featured missions taking place in, among other locations, Manhattan, Rome and Brazil.

Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag
Main article: Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag
Samples taken from Desmond Miles' body in the moments after his death have enabled Abstergo Industries to continue to explore his genetic memories using the Animus' newfound cloud computing abilities. The unnamed player character is hired by Abstergo's entertainment division to sift through the memories of Edward Kenway, an eighteenth-century pirate and the grandfather of Connor. Ostensibly, this is to gather material for an Animus-powered interactive feature film, but in reality, Abstergo and the Templars are searching for the Observatory, a Precursor structure that allows the user to see through the eyes of a subject. As Kenway, the player must unravel a conspiracy between high-ranking Templars to manipulate the British, Spanish and French empires into locating the Sage - later identified as Bartholomew Roberts - who is the only man who can lead them to the Observatory.

In the present day, the player is contacted by John, Abstergo Entertainment's information technology manager. John convinces the player that his employer knows more than they are telling, and encourages them to investigate in more detail. He arranges for the player to access the Animus' core, at which point Juno materialises into an incorporeal form. She reveals that although it was necessary to open her temple to avert disaster, the world was not ready for her, and she is unable to affect it or possess the player character as her agents intended. John is unmasked as the reincarnated form of the Sage and attempts to murder the player to cover up the failed attempt at resurrecting Juno, but is killed by Abstergo's security before he can do so. As Roberts, the Sage admits to Kenway that he owes no allegiance to the Assassins or the Templars and instead uses whoever he thinks represents his best chance of achieving his ends.

Assassin's Creed Rogue
Main article: Assassin's Creed Rogue
By March 2014, a game titled or code-named "Comet", was revealed to be in development, for release on PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360.[9] By the end of the month, additional reports indicated that "Comet" would be set around 1758 in New York, as well as feature sailing on the Atlantic Ocean. The game would be a direct sequel to Black Flag, and would feature a Templar named Shay as the main protagonist. Haytham Kenway from III and Adewal from Black Flag would also make appearances.[10] On August 5, Ubisoft officially announced the game as Assassin's Creed Rogue. The game features the Templar Shay Patrick Cormac, a first for the series, and is set during the Seven Years' War across various locations in North America.[11] It is meant to "fill the gaps" of the story between III and Black Flag and has "a crucial link to the Kenway saga", as well as connecting to Unity.[12] It was released in North America on the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 on November 11, 2014[11] and in Europe and Australasia on November 13, 2014.[13] It was released on Windows in March 2015.[14]

Assassin's Creed Unity
Main article: Assassin's Creed Unity
On March 19, 2014, images leaked for the next game, titled or code-named Unity, showing a new assassin in Paris.[9] On March 21, Ubisoft confirmed the game's existence, having been in development for more than three years, by releasing pre-alpha game footage.[15] The game, which features up to four player co-op, a first for the series,[16] is set in Paris on the eve of the French Revolution and follow Arno Dorian and his fellow assassins.[17] It was released in North America on the PlayStation 4, Xbox One and Windows on November 11, 2014 and in Europe and Australasia on November 13, 2014.[13]

Assassin's Creed Syndicate
Main article: Assassin's Creed Syndicate
In December 2014, images and information leaked for a new Assassin's Creed game, titled or code-named Victory, which was later confirmed by Ubisoft. Victory will release in late 2015 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One and is being developed by Ubisoft Quebec. It will be set in 1868 Victorian era London and feature a new assassin protagonist.[18] In May 2015, Kotaku leaked that Victory has been renamed Syndicate.[19] On May 12, 2015, the game was officially announced by Ubisoft.[20] The PlayStation 4 and the Xbox One version of the game was released on October 23, 2015, while the Microsoft Windows version was released on November 19, 2015.[21]

Other games
Assassin's Creed: Alta?r's Chronicles
Main article: Assassin's Creed: Alta?r's Chronicles
Alta?r Ibn-La'Ahad is sent on a mission from the Order of Assassins to retrieve a Chalice from the grasps of both the Crusaders and the Saracens. Alta?r quests to find three different magic keys then travels to Jerusalem to face the head of the Knights Templar, Basilisk. Upon arriving, he learns that the Chalice is not an object, but a woman named Adha who reveals that Alta?r has been deceived by an assassin named Harash, who is now a double-agent for the Templars. After killing both Harash and Basilisk, Alta?r attempts to save a kidnapped Adha from captivity but is too late. The game ends with a captured Adha sailing away and Alta?r left in the holy land.

Assassin's Creed: Bloodlines
Main article: Assassin's Creed: Bloodlines
Alta?r has traveled to Cyprus from the Holy Land in order to assassinate the last remnants of the Templars. Here Alta?r again meets Maria and they travel together to kill the remaining Templars and learn more about the "Apple of Eden" and the mysterious Templar Archive where more of the artifacts are believed to be hidden. Alta?r manages to kill the new Templar Grand Master, Armand Bouchart, and his followers, but the Archive's contents are discovered to have already been taken from Cyprus.

Assassin's Creed II: Discovery
Main article: Assassin's Creed II: Discovery
After losing the Apple of Eden to Girolamo Savonarola, Ezio is told to meet Antonio, his fellow Assassin. When doing so, Ezio finds Antonio with another man named Luis Santangel, who asks Ezio to rescue his friend Christoffa Corombo from a presumed Templar trap set up by Rodrigo Borgia. Ezio rescues Christoffa from this trap, and is informed that Assassins in Spain are captured and executed by Tomas Torquemada. Ezio, who feels that it is his duty to rescue the Assassins, sets out for Spain to fight back against the Spanish Inquisition. Along the way, Ezio finds out that Torquemada was ordered to commit these actions by Rodrigo Borgia, who leads Torquemada to believe that God desired it so. Ezio also finds out that his close allies, Luis Santangel and Raphael Sanchez, are in fact Assassins themselves. When finally confronting Torquemada, Ezio chooses not to kill him thinking that Torquemada is merely misled by Borgia and not a Templar himself. Ezio then returns to Italy to continue his search for the Apple of Eden.

Assassin's Creed: Project Legacy
Assassin's Creed: Project Legacy was a single-player browser-based role-playing game Facebook application, designed as a promotion, and tie-in for Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood. The game is mostly text-based, but includes graphics and sound as well as some video.

Players are test subjects for Abstergo Industries who relive the lives of other test subjects' ancestors through the DDS (Data Dump Scanner) as opposed to the Animus. These ancestors are Assassins.

The first mission pack is titled "Italian Wars," and is divided into four chapters. Chapter one focuses on Bartolomeo d'Alviano during the Battle of Agnadello. The second chapter focuses on Francesco Vecellio on a mission to kill Niccol di Pitigliano (cousin of Bartolomeo d'Alviano). The third focuses on Mario Auditore and the protection of Monteriggioni. The fourth and final chapter focuses on Perotto Calderon, an undercover assassin who watches over Lucrezia Borgia, with whom he falls in love.

The second mission pack, entitled "Rome," was released November 16, 2010. The first chapter takes place between 1497 and 1503, and deals with the ex-courtesan, Fiora Cavazza. It deals with Fiora's involvement in recruiting an army for the Borgia, and her subsequent betrayal. The second takes place in 1503, and involves Giovanni Borgia, fleeing his family and eventually joining the assassins. Chapter three involves Francesco Vecellio, and his training to be an assassin under Ezio Auditore. Chapter four again focuses on Giovanni Borgia, now an Assassin and joining Hernn Corts on his journey to Tenochtitlan to acquire a "Piece of Eden," one of the Crystal Skulls. Giovanni brought it to Bombastus for study, resulting in the discovery of the formula for the Philosopher's stone.

The third mission pack, entitled "Holidays," and its first Chapter called Ghosts of Christmas Past were released on December 21, 2010 with further missions to be released in 2011.[needs update] The first chapter takes place at various times and places in history: during the World War I Christmas Truce, the Beagle 2 truth, the return of Charles II back to England, and the time of the Shroud of Turin.

A fourth story pack, "The Divine Science Story Pack" was announced, but never released. Also, an updated user interface, referred to as the "DDS 2.0", was listed as coming soon, with enhancements and an easier way of choosing mission packs and crafting equipment, however this was also never released.

The game was later shutdown from Facebook and put on an indefinite hold. According to Ubisoft, the reason for the shutdown was that the game's manager had mysteriously disappeared, although it was clearly for marketing purposes. It is unknown when the game will be back into action.

Assassin's Creed: Recollection
Assassin's Creed: Recollection is a real-time board game developed for iOS. The game delivers a new experience to the Assassin's Creed world in which fans and new players alike go head-to-head in real-time political battles with characters and locations from the franchise. Players can also unlock a collection of artwork, spanning the series. The game features over 280 Memories, reconnecting with characters from Assassin's Creed II and Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood. The single-player Story Mode has 10+ hours of gameplay, with 20 missions taking place from Barcelona to Constantinople and 10 challenge missions. In Versus Mode, players can challenge their friends and people from around the world, pitting their strategies and abilities against one another. The game supports Game Center, allowing players to track achievements, challenge friends, and play against the world over. Go behinds the scenes with the Art Gallery, a collection of artwork spanning the entire franchise (Assassin's Creed, Assassin's Creed II, Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood, Assassin's Creed: Revelations and Assassin's Creed III) showcasing the high level of quality in character design as well as the attention to detail in the locations. Through the Store, players have the option to Buy Packs for the in-game currency, Animus Credits (Animus Credits may also be purchased through an In-App Purchase), or to Buy/Sell Memories from/to other players in the Market. The short film Assassin's Creed: Embers is also featured within the game.[22]

Assassin's Creed: Multiplayer Rearmed
Assassin's Creed: Multiplayer Rearmed is a multiplayer video game designed for iOS. It is the only Assassin's Creed Multiplayer driven by an in-game economy. The aim is to assassinate the assigned target and avoid being killed by your own hunter. The player can purchase additional items, characters and abilities as well as compete with friends and foes from around the globe in a 4 player realtime online multiplayer mode. Players can connect via Game Center using either WI-FI or 3G. It is also possible to play against someone in the immediate area via Bluetooth. Available map locations include Jerusalem, San Donato, Venice and Alhambra.[23]

Assassin's Creed III: Liberation
Main article: Assassin's Creed III: Liberation
An original Assassin's Creed title for the PlayStation Vita was announced to be in development during Gamescom 2011, and would feature a new story with new characters. On June 4, 2012 at E3, Liberation was officially announced.[24] The main protagonist is a Creole female, named Aveline.[25] Aveline is the daughter of a French merchant father and an African mother. She is recruited into the Assassin Order by a former slave and fights against slavery as well as the Templars. Aveline uses a variety of new weapons in combat, including a machete and a blowpipe for ranged attacks.

It was announced on September 10, 2013, that the game would be re-released as Assassin's Creed: Liberation HD for PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and Microsoft Windows via the PlayStation Network, Xbox Live Arcade and Steam, respectively, in January 2014.[26]

Assassin's Creed: Pirates
Assassin's Creed: Pirates is a mobile game, that was released on iOS and Android devices on December 5, 2013.[27] Developed by Ubisoft Paris,[28] the game follows Captain Alonzo Batilla, who is neither Assassin nor Templar, as he commands a ship and crew, while crossing paths with the Assassins and Templars. Gameplay focuses on real-time battles between ships. The title is in 3D and features both wind and weather that will affect how players proceed.[29]

Assassin's Creed Memories
Assassin's Creed Memories is a mobile game that was released on iOS devices on August 20, 2014. Developed along with PlayNext and Gree, the game combines card collection and battling, target chasing, and strategy elements, along with the option of competitive multiplayer. Additional multiplayer options include allowing players to join a guild and then engage in 20 vs 20 guild combat scenarios. Memories features different historical eras, including the Third Crusade, the golden age of piracy, feudal Japan and the Mongolian Empire.[30]

Assassin's Creed Chronicles
Main article: Assassin's Creed Chronicles
Assassin's Creed Chronicles is an episodic 2.5D action game for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One. The first episode is available with the purchase of Assassin's Creed Unity's DLC season pass and features Shao Jun in 16th century China.[31] The second entry, India, was released on January 12, 2016 on the same platforms, and the last entry, Russia, was released on February 9, 2016.[32]

Assassin's Creed Identity
Main article: Assassin's Creed Identity
Assassin's Creed Identity is a game for iOS devices that was released worldwide on 25 February 2016. It is a 3D third-person role-playing game. It had a soft-launch in Australia and New Zealand in 2014.[33]

Cancelled games
Assassin's Creed: Lost Legacy
Assassin's Creed: Lost Legacy was a planned Nintendo 3DS title. It would see Ezio travel to Masyaf. However, the concept evolved into what would become Assassin's Creed: Revelations, and the 3DS title was announced as cancelled on July 15, 2011.[34]

Assassin's Creed: Utopia
Assassin's Creed: Utopia is a cancelled mobile game which was planned to be available on Android and iOS devices.[35][36] The game's story would have led into Assassin's Creed III, though there would have been no links in terms of gameplay.[37]

Utopia would have taken place in the 17th century, at the very beginning of the colonization of North America. It would have spaned over 150 years, to help players "discover how the Assassins influenced history and helped shape the nation's original thirteen colonies."[38] The gameplay involved building a colonial city, and was planned to have more of a "social slant" than any of the earlier games.[citation needed] The Assassins of each colony would have taken on their enemies in "limited time epic battles", and players would have been able to pit their strength against friends in asynchronous 3D brawls.[38]

Future
Asked about the future of the series in 2009, Sbastien Puel from Ubisoft said that "we could do 35 of these [Assassin's Creed games]",[39] while Laurent Detoc from Ubisoft later said "we hope to reach Assassin's Creed 10".[40]

In November 2011, a Ubisoft survey was sent out, asking participants which locations and time periods they would like to see in the "next Assassin's Creed games". These settings were Medieval China, Victorian England, Ancient Egypt, the Portuguese and/or Spanish Invasion of the Americas, the American Revolution, the Russian Revolution, Feudal Japan, and Ancient Rome.[41] Alex Hutchinson, creative director of Assassin's Creed III, suggested the most requested Assassin's Creed settings, World War II, Feudal Japan and Ancient Egypt, are "the three worst settings for an Assassin's Creed game".[42] However, Hutchinson stated both he and Corey May were open to the idea of a future entry set during the time of the British Raj,[43] which now consists of the modern states of India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Myanmar. Victorian England, the American Revolution and the Russian Revolution were subsequently used for Assassin's Creed Syndicate, Assassin's Creed III, and Assassin's Creed Chronicles, respectively, with World War II appearing as a section of Syndicate.

In June 2013, Ubisoft CEO Yves Guillemot stated on the development cycle of the games, saying, "We are making sure the teams who are creating the different iterations have enough timetwo years, three years, so that they can take risk and they can change the concept enough so that it can be appealing and fresh."[44] The following August, Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag's director Ashraf Ismail, said that the ending of the franchise had been written, saying "We have an idea of where the end is, what the end is. But of course Yves [Guillemot] announced we are a yearly title, we ship one game a year. So depending on the setting, depending on what fans want, we've given ourselves room to fit more in this arc. But there is an end."[45] In a later interview, Ismail commented that he and the team would be interested in doing an Assassin's Creed game in an Ancient Egyptian setting, along with reiterating an earlier statement that a female leading character was not an impossibility for the series.[46]

In May 2014, Guillemot stated that Assassin's Creed games would continue releasing on the last generation PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 "for the foreseeable future", despite the franchise moving to the current generation PlayStation 4 and Xbox One with Assassin's Creed Unity.[47] In February 2016, Ubisoft announced they would not be releasing a new game in 2016 in order to step "back and [re-examine] the Assassins Creed franchise... [and take the] year to evolve the game mechanics and to make sure were delivering on the promise of Assassins Creed offering unique and memorable gameplay experiences".[48] On the decision, Guillemot said that "Ubisoft started to question the annualized franchise with the release of Assassin's Creed Unity, and the fact that Assassin's Creed Syndicate had "a slower launch than expected." Guillemot added that "by moving away from the annual iterations of the franchise, it will give the Assassin's Creed teams more time to take advantage of new engines and technology."[49]

Other media
Ubisoft expanded Assassin's Creed franchise to other media, including films, comic books and novels.

Comics
Assassin's Creed: Graphic Novel
In the limited edition of Assassin's Creed, an 8-page graphic novel was included, that showed two side-stories of Alta?r Ibn-La'Ahad and Desmond Miles. The novel was also distributed to EB Games store managers in 2007 to promote the game. The story serves as a prelude to the first Assassin's Creed game and is narrated simultaneously by both characters. In it, the novel covers Desmond's escape from Abstergo in the year 2012 and also one of Alta?r's assassination missions in the year 1191. The start of the novel involves the introduction of the two characters with Alta?r calling himself a hunter, while Desmond is a prisoner. Although initially they describe themselves otherwise, by the end of the novel they both re-introduce themselves as assassins.

Assassin's Creed, Volume 1: Desmond
Assassin's Creed Volume 1: Desmond is a French-language graphic novel written by Eric Corbeyran and drawn by Djilalli Defaux. It has been released only in France, Canada, Belgium, Poland and Italy. The comic book was published on November 13, 2009, a few days before Assassin's Creed II was released.[50] The story is a retelling of events from Assassin's Creed and the beginning of Assassin's Creed II, mostly from Desmond's modern perspective; for example it is revealed that Lucy helped the Templars to kidnap Desmond. It also features Subject 16 (referred to as Michael) and a Roman assassin named Aquilus. However, events in the comic book are different from what happens in the game. It is said that Subject 16 is alive but trapped in the animus, a virtual reality simulator used to relive memories of ancient relatives, but there's no mention of Shaun or Rebecca.[51]

Assassin's Creed, Volume 2: Aquilus
Assassin's Creed Volume 2: Aquilus is a French-language graphic novel written by Eric Corbeyran and drawn by Djilalli Defaux. The story opens with a young Desmond recalling his conversation with his father. He wakes up and has a conversation with Lucy. After meeting Rebecca, Shaun and other assassins, they get into a truck and drive to Monteriggioni.

In the meantime, Desmond relives memories of Aquilus through the animus after his apparent death in the first volume. The Roman assassin is rescued by his cousin, Accipiter, and is tasked with a quest to save Lugdunum. He meets with his father and discovers an artifact of the first civilization: an ankh which can temporarily revive the dead. The mysterious object is then stolen by a Templar senator, Vultur, who kills Aquilus' father.

The modern day story continues as Assassins fight Abstergo agents when they're ambushed on the road. Later, it is revealed that there's a traitor among in the Assassins' truck, and Desmond deals with the situation. The group finally arrives in Monteriggioni and at the end, it's hinted that the ankh artifact might be hidden within the town's walls.

Assassin's Creed, Volume 3: Accipiter
Jonathan Hawk was sent by a suited executive and a lab technician to relive Accipiter's memories. He was sent to 259 CE, when Accipiter's Alamans were crossng the Rodanus into Genava and Aube to face the Roman forces at Oppidum. The battle raged bloodily and long, but Accipiter's forces were eventually victorious. Accipiter was met by the Iberian Assassin Cuervo after the battle, the latter coming to congratulate the Alamans on their victory and to discuss the future.

Assassin's Creed, Volume 4: Hawk
Assassin's Creed, Volume 4: Hawk is the fourth volume of the French graphic novels. It is centered on the story of Jonathan Hawk and his Egyptian ancestor Numa Al'Khamsin, a member of the Assassins in the 14th century. It was released on November 16, 2012.

Assassin's Creed, Volume 5: El Cakr
Assassin's Creed, Volume 5: El Cakr is the fifth volume of the French graphic novels. It is centered on the story of Jonathan Hawk and his Egyptian ancestor Numa Al'Khamsin, also known as "El Cakr". It was released on October 31, 2013.

Assassin's Creed, Volume 6: Leila
Assassin's Creed, Volume 6: Leila is the sixth volume of the French graphic novels. It is centered on the story of Jonathan Hawk and his Egyptian ancestor Numa Al'Khamsin, also known as "El Cakr". It is the last of the Egyptian storyline. It was released on October 31, 2014.

Assassin's Creed: The Fall
Main article: Assassin's Creed: The Fall
In July 2010, Ubisoft announced a three-part comic book mini-series set in the world of Assassin's Creed as a part of their UbiWorkshop initiative.[52] Ubisoft has hired illustrators Cameron Stewart and Karl Kerschl, both winners of multiple comic book awards.[53] The first issue of the series was released on November 10, 2010, the second part on December 1, 2010. It was published by WildStorm.[54] The comic takes place between 1888 and 1908 in Russia and 1998 set in the United States. It follows Nikolai Orelov and his descendant Daniel Cross, a recovering alcoholic experiencing the bleeding effect in a therapist's office.

Assassin's Creed: The Chain
Main article: Assassin's Creed: The Chain
The Chain is a sequel comic to The Fall that completes Nikolai Orelov's story as well as focusing on his descendant, Daniel Cross. The comic will also provide some light on the events of Assassin's Creed III. It was released in mid-2012.[55]

Assassin's Creed: Brahman
Main article: Assassin's Creed: Brahman
Brahman is set in 19th century India, and introduced the new assassin, Arbaaz Mir. It was written by Brendan Fletcher with art by Cameron Stewart and Karl Kerschl. It was released in late-2013 in North America.[56]

Assassin's Creed: Trial by Fire
Main article: Assassin's Creed: Trial by Fire
Oscillating between contemporary San Diego and the Salem witch trials, "Assassin's Creed" follows Charlotte de la Cruz, an over-educated conspiracy theorist, who soon comes under attack from Templars after learning she is the descendent of Assassins.[57] The series is published by Titan Comics, and is written by Kill Shakespeare's Anthony Del Col and Conor McCreery, illustrated by Neil Edwards, and coloured by Ivan Nunes.[58]

Films
Theatrical
Main article: Assassin's Creed (film)
A live-action film, Assassin's Creed, set in the same universe as the video games and other media,[59] is scheduled to be released on December 16, 2016.[60] Development for the film began in October 2011, when Sony Pictures entered final negotiations with Ubisoft Motion Pictures to make the film.[61] In July 2012, Michael Fassbender was announced to star in the film, as well as co-produce the film.[62] His role was revealed in August 2015 as Callum Lynch, who's ancestor Aguilar, is an assassin from 15th Century Spain.[63] In October 2012, Ubisoft revealed the film would no longer produced by Sony Pictures, instead co-produced with New Regency and distributed by 20th Century Fox.[64] In January 2013, Michael Lesslie was hired to write the film,[65] with Scott Frank, Adam Cooper and Bill Collage performing rewrites to the script.[66][67] By the end of April 2014, Justin Kurzel was in talks to direct.[68] Principal photography began on August 31, 2015,[63][69][70] and ended on January 15, 2016.[71]

Other
Assassin's Creed: Lineage
Main article: Assassin's Creed: Lineage
Assassin's Creed: Lineage is a 36-minute film serving as a prequel to Assassin's Creed II. The film, released in three parts on YouTube, promoted the game and is the first attempt for Ubisoft to make its first step in the film industry. It is about the story of Giovanni Auditore, Ezio's father, who investigates the mysterious assassination of Duke of Milan Galeazzo Maria Sforza and first learns about Rodrigo Borgia's conspiracy.

Assassin's Creed: Ascendance
Ascendance is an animated short by UbiWorkshop and Ubisoft Montreal, which bridges the gap between Assassin's Creed II and Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood. It tells the backstory of Cesare Borgia's rise to power. The animated short was released on November 16, 2010. The short story takes place in the middle of the events of Brotherhood as Ezio Auditore sits and gathers information about Cesare Borgia, from a hooded man who is later revealed to be Leonardo da Vinci. It is available for purchase on Xbox Live, PlayStation Store and iTunes Store.[72]

Assassin's Creed: Embers
Embers is an animated short film created by UbiWorkshop. The film is included as a bonus in Signature and collector's editions of Assassin's Creed: Revelations. UbiWorkShop released a teaser trailer on July 21, 2011, which was featured at Comic-Con 2011. The Embers trailer shows an older Ezio with his family. He fears someone is trying to get him.[73][74] The developers described Embers at the 2011 Comic Con, at the Assassins Creed panel as a final epilogue to Ezio's story, and although can be watched anytime, should be watched after the completion of Assassin's Creed: Revelations story, to fully understand and complete the tale of Ezio Auditore da Firenze.[75]

The short film follows an elderly Ezio, living a peaceful life in the Tuscan countryside with his wife Sofia and his children Flavia and Marcello and writing his memoirs. One day a stranger appears, a Chinese female Assassin called Shao Jun, who came to Ezio in order to seek knowledge of his life as an Assassin. Although Ezio prefers that Jun not stay, due to his desire to leave his days as an Assassin behind, Sofia allows her to stay for the night. The next day, Ezio catches Jun reading his memoirs and bids her to leave, but relents after she asks him about what it means to be an Assassin. While on a trip to Firenze, Ezio then recounts his story of how his father and brothers were executed in the town square, forcing him to become an Assassin, and how such a life is defined by the pain it brings and causes. As they leave, the two are attacked by a stranger, who appears to be of Asian origin as well. After killing him, Jun reveals that she was a former concubine, now on the run from servants of the Chinese Zhengde Emperor, and explains how her former master rescued her from his influence. After returning to his home, Ezio tells Sofia and his children to leave, knowing that others would come. He then teaches Jun the key to liberating her people from the Emperor's influence. Later that night, Ezio's villa is attacked by more of Shao Jun's enemies, and after a fight, he successfully eliminates them all. The next morning, Ezio hands Shao Jun a small box and tells her it may come to use one day, but only if "you lose your way". He then sends her away as two riders appear at the villa. Sometime afterward Ezio journeys to Firenze with his wife Sofia and their daughter Flavia, despite suffering from heart problems. While resting on a bench and after having a short conversation with a young man with a scar on his face, similar to the sort of man he used to be, he exhales and dies in view of his family. The film then ends as a final letter from Ezio to Sofia is read, saying that of all the things that kept him going throughout life, love for the world around him was the strongest of them all.

Novels
Main article: Assassin's Creed (book series)
Assassin's Creed: Renaissance
Assassin's Creed: Renaissance is a novel based on the Assassin's Creed series written by Oliver Bowden and published by Penguin Books. It is a novelised version of the game Assassin's Creed II; however, rather than spanning a vast period of time, it is set only in the 15th century with no mention of the game's present-day events.

Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood
Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood is a continuation of the Assassin's Creed series written by Oliver Bowden and published by Penguin Books. It is a novelized version of the game Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood just like its previous book. Also, it does not contain any of the game's present-day events including Desmond, only a reference to a "phantom" by Ezio. Unlike the events of the game which start in 1499, this version of the story starts in 1503.

Assassin's Creed: The Secret Crusade
Assassin's Creed: The Secret Crusade is the third Assassin's Creed book by Oliver Bowden and published by Penguin Books. The story is told by Niccol Polo, father of Marco Polo, and is about the life of Alta?r ibn la-Ahad. It was released on June 20, 2011.[76]

Assassin's Creed: Revelations
Assassin's Creed: Revelations is the fourth novel in the continuation of the Assassin's Creed series written by Oliver Bowden and published by Penguin Books. The novel release date is November 24, 2011 for the United Kingdom and November 29, 2011 for the North America. Like the previous novels of Renaissance and Brotherhood, it is a novelised version of the game Assassin's Creed: Revelations. Additionally like the prior novels, it does not contain any of the game's present-day events including Desmond. Like the game, Ezio Auditore must leave his life behind in search of answers, in search of the truth. In Assassin's Creed: Revelations, master assassin Ezio Auditore walks in the footsteps of the legendary mentor Altair, on a journey of discovery and revelation. It is a perilous pathone that will take Ezio to Constantinople, the heart of the Ottoman Empire, where a growing army of Templars threatens to destabilise the region.[77]

Assassin's Creed: Forsaken
Assassin's Creed: Forsaken is a continuation of the Assassin's Creed series written by Oliver Bowden. It covers the life of Haytham Kenway during his years before and during the events of Assassin's Creed III.

Assassin's Creed: Black Flag
Assassin's Creed: Black Flag is a continuation of the Assassin's Creed series written by Oliver Bowden. The novel chronicles the events of the game with the same name. It was released on November 7, 2013.

Assassin's Creed: Unity
Assassin's Creed: Unity is a continuation of the Assassin's Creed series written by Oliver Bowden. The novel focuses on the events of the game from Elise's perspective, and then Arno's perspective after Elise's death at the hands of Templar Grand Master Fran?ois-Thomas Germain, who was later killed by Arno. It was released on November 20, 2014.

Assassin's Creed: Underworld
Assassin's Creed Underworld unveils the story of Master Assassin Henry Green/Jayadeep Mir, the son of Indian Master Assassin Arbaaz Mir and his wife Pyara Kaur (the two debuted in Assassin's Creed:Brahman), six years before the events depicted in Assassin's Creed: Syndicate.

Books
Assassin's Creed: Encyclopedia
UbiWorkshop released an encyclopedia of the Assassin's Creed series in 2011. Initially intended as an art book, the project gathered so much material that the company decided to expand it into an encyclopedia. It will still feature works of artists, such as Craig Mullins, Tavis Coburn, 123Klan, Gabz and James NG. Artists were given creative freedom, as they were able to create a unique Assassin from the period of their choosing. The art book contains a "carte blanche" section, which is going to contain fan-submitted artwork. The original cost of this is $39.95.[78][79]

In November 2012, to coincide with the release of Assassin's Creed III, UbiWorkshop released a second edition of the encyclopedia. This Edition contained an additional 120 new pages of content, covering both Assassin's Creed III and Assassin's Creed: The Chain, as well as revised content based on feedback.[80]

The Third Edition of the Assassin's Creed Encyclopedia is an updated hardcover edition incorporating information of characters and events from Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag and Assassin's Creed: Brahman along with new artwork and concept art. It was released worldwide on November 11, 2013 and includes 390 pages of new content and a revised version of the second edition, which is also available to purchase from UbiWorkshop.[81]

In other media
In the 2009 Wii game Academy of Champions: Soccer, Alta?r appears as a playable character along with other Ubisoft characters.[82] In the 2012 game Soulcalibur V, Ezio appears as a playable fighter.[83] Sackboy, the player character from LittleBigPlanet and its sequel, can be costumed as Ezio.[84] In Prince of Persia: The Forgotten Sands there is an unlockable outfit through Uplay.[85] In Prince of Persia (2008), Alta?r's Costume can be unlocked with a code obtained by pre-ordering the game.[citation needed] Final Fantasy XIII-2 has a costume of Ezio from Assassin's Creed: Revelations as an optional costume option as DLC.[86] In PC/Mac versions of Team Fortress 2, two promotional items were introduced in 2011 months before Assassin's Creed: Revelations' release. These were both for the class Spy, the first item being the iconic hidden blade, the second a hood based on the one Ezio wore in Revelations.[citation needed] In Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots, the outfit of Alta?r is available as an unlockable, though, originally, it was only an April Fools joke by Hideo Kojima.[citation needed] In the 2011 Indian film Velayudham, the superhero costume worn by the protagonist is visibly based on Alta?r's in Assassin's Creed.[87][88]

Reception
Aggregate review scores
As of December 4, 2015.
Game	Metacritic
Assassin's Creed	(PC) 79[89]
(PS3) 81[90]
(X360) 81[91]
Assassin's Creed: Alta?r's Chronicles	(NDS) 58[92]
Assassin's Creed: Bloodlines	(PSP) 63[93]
Assassin's Creed II	(PC) 86[94]
(PS3) 91[95]
(X360) 90[96]
Assassin's Creed II: Discovery	(NDS) 69[97]
Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood	(PC) 88[98]
(PS3) 90[99]
(X360) 89[100]
Assassin's Creed: Revelations	(PC) 80[101]
(PS3) 80[102]
(X360) 80[103]
Assassin's Creed III	(PC) 80[104]
(PS3) 85[105]
(WIIU) 85[106]
(X360) 84[107]
Assassin's Creed III: Liberation	(PC) 66[108]
(PS3) 64[109]
(Vita) 70[110]
(X360) 62[111]
Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag	(PC) 84[112]
(PS3) 88[113]
(PS4) 83[114]
(WIIU) 86[115]
(X360) 86[116]
Assassin's Creed Rogue	(PC) 74[117]
(PS3) 72[118]
(X360) 72[119]
Assassin's Creed Unity	(PC) 70[120]
(PS4) 70[121]
(XONE) 72[122]
Assassin's Creed Syndicate	(PC) 75[123]
(PS4) 76[124]
(XONE) 78[125]
The Assassin's Creed series, particularly the main games, have received mainly positive reviews from fans and critics, many of whom have called Assassin's Creed "...the standout series on [the seventh generation] of consoles".[126] The series has sold over 73 million copies as of April 2014.[127]

References
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Altair's Chronicles for Palm Pre". Gameloft. Retrieved December 26, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Facts & Figures". Ubisoft. Retrieved April 21, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Interview: Assassin's Creed". CVG. Retrieved September 2, 2012.
Jump up ^ "The Making Of: Assassins Creed". EDGE. August 27, 2012. Archived from the original on December 23, 2013. Retrieved March 3, 2013.
Jump up ^ Bryan Vore (March 4, 2013). "Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag". Gameinformer.com. Retrieved March 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ George, Richard (March 4, 2013). "The Dawn of Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag". IGN. Retrieved August 30, 2013.
Jump up ^ "GameStop Placeholder Art Names Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood C Update". Kotaku.com. May 5, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
Jump up ^ Harman, Stace (March 27, 2012). "Connor goes loud: Assassins Creed III gets first showing". VG247. Retrieved June 19, 2012.
^ Jump up to: a b Schreier, Jason (March 19, 2014). "Leaked Images Reveal One Of This Fall's Two Assassin's Creed Games". Kotaku. Retrieved March 19, 2014.
Jump up ^ Schreier, Jason (March 27, 2014). "Sources: Assassin's Creed Comet Will Let You Play As A Templar". Kotaku. Retrieved March 27, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b McWhertor, Michael (August 5, 2014). "Assassin's Creed Rogue confirmed by Ubisoft - here's the first trailer". Polygon. Retrieved August 5, 2014.
Jump up ^ Wallace, Kimberly (August 5, 2014). "September Cover Revealed C Assassin's Creed Rogue And Unity". Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved August 5, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b Karmali, Luke (August 28, 2014). "Assassin's Creed Unity Release Date Delayed To November". IGN. Retrieved August 28, 2014.
Jump up ^ Futter, Mike (October 13, 2014). "Assassins Creed Rogue Coming To PC In 2015". Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved October 13, 2014.
Jump up ^ Karmali, Luke (March 21, 2014). "Ubisoft Confirms Assassin's Creed: Unity, Release Date Teased". IGN. Retrieved March 21, 2014.
Jump up ^ Jackson, Leah B. (June 9, 2014). "E3 2014: Assassin's Creed Unity Co-Op Revealed". IGN. Retrieved June 9, 2014.
Jump up ^ Lien, Tracey (June 9, 2014). "Assassin's Creed Unity hits Oct. 28, pre-orders live". Polygon. Retrieved June 9, 2014.
Jump up ^ Schreier, Jason (December 1, 2014). "Next Year's Big Assassin's Creed Is Set In Victorian London [UPDATE]". Kotaku. Retrieved December 4, 2014.
Jump up ^ Schreier, Jason. "Next Assassin's Creed To Be Announced Next Week; Now Called Syndicate". Retrieved May 7, 2015.
Jump up ^ Sarker, Samit (May 12, 2015). "Assassin's Creed Syndicate announced, set in Victorian London". Polygon. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
Jump up ^ Phillips, Tom (May 12, 2015). "Assassin's Creed: Syndicate launches 23rd October on PS4, Xbox One". Eurogamer. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Recollection for iPhone 3GS, iPhone 4, iPhone 4S, iPhone 5, iPod touch (2nd generation), iPod touch (3rd generation), iPod touch (4th generation), iPod touch (5th generation), and iPad on the iTunes App Store". itunes.apple.com. August 18, 2012. Retrieved November 30, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Rearmed for iPhone 3GS, iPhone 4, iPhone 4S, iPod touch (2nd generation), iPod touch (3rd generation), iPod touch (4th generation) and iPad on the iTunes App Store". Itunes.apple.com. May 3, 2012. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Sony announces white PS Vita bundle with Assassin's Creed III: Liberation". Engadget. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Gamescom: Assassin's Creed, Rayman on Vita - PSP News at IGN". Psp.ign.com. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ Lewis, Anne (October 24, 2013). "ASSASSINS CREED LIBERATION HD C RELEASE DATE AND PRE-ORDER BONUSES". UbiBlog. Ubisoft. Retrieved October 24, 2013.
Jump up ^ Goldfarb, Andrew (November 25, 2013). "Assassins Creed Pirates Release Date, Price Announced". IGN. Retrieved November 26, 2013.
Jump up ^ Goldfarb, Andrew (September 10, 2013). "Assassins Creed Liberation HD, Pirates Announced". IGN. Retrieved September 10, 2013.
Jump up ^ Futter, Mike (September 10, 2013). "Assassin's Creed: Pirates Brings The High Seas To Small Devices". Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved September 10, 2013.
Jump up ^ Miller, Matt (August 21, 2014). "Assassins Creed Memories Launches On iOS". Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved August 22, 2014.
Jump up ^ Marchiafavra, Jeff (September 22, 2014). "Assassin's Creed Unity Season Pass Includes Newly Announced 2.5D Downloadable Title". Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved September 22, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Chronicles Trilogy Announced". IGN. 2014-03-31. Retrieved 2014-03-31.
Jump up ^ Sinha, Robin (October 1, 2014). "Ubisoft Unveils Assassin's Creed Identity for IPhone and IPad". NDTV Gadgets. NDTV Convergence Limited. Retrieved October 16, 2014.
Jump up ^ Philips, Tom. "Assassin's Creed: Lost Legacy canned". Eurogamer.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Utopia geannuleerd". Gamer.nl. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
Jump up ^ "GREE: GREE and Ubisoft? Team Up to Deliver New Assassin's Creed Mobile Game". Retrieved October 6, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Eurogamer: Assassin's Creed: Utopia won't link with AC3 beyond story". Eurogamer.net. June 21, 2012. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b "Eurogamer: Assassin's Creed Utopia is a city-building battler". Eurogamer.net. September 6, 2012. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
Jump up ^ Bramwell, Tom (October 14, 2009). "Ubi: We could do 35 Assassin's Creeds News ? News ?". Eurogamer.net. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ Ivan, Tom (June 11, 2012). "News: Ubisoft 'hopes to reach Assassin's Creed 10'". ComputerAndVideoGames.com. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ "AC:3 Possible Locations Named In Survey". CVG. November 29, 2011. Retrieved November 30, 2011.
Jump up ^ Dutton, Fred (April 4, 2012). "Ubisoft: WW2, Japan and Egypt would make dismal Assassin's Creed locations". Eurogamer.net. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ Makuch, Eddie. "India-set Assassin's Creed on Ubisoft's radar". GameSpot.
Jump up ^ Totilo, Stephen (June 14, 2013). "Ubisoft Has Three Assassin's Creeds in Development, Vows Innovation". Retrieved June 14, 2013.
Jump up ^ Tom Phillips (August 5, 2013). ""There is an end" to the Assassin's Creed series, Ubisoft says". Eurogamer. Retrieved August 5, 2013.
Jump up ^ Mitch Dyer (October 10, 2013). "Assassin's Creed 4 Director on Egypt Setting, Future of Franchise". IGN. Retrieved October 10, 2013.
Jump up ^ Watts, Steve (May 15, 2014). "Assassin's Creed Games Coming To PS3, Xbox 360 For 'Foreseeable Future'". IGN. Retrieved May 16, 2014.
Jump up ^ "A MESSAGE FROM THE ASSASSINS CREED TEAM". Ubisoft. February 11, 2016. Retrieved February 11, 2016.
Jump up ^ Macy, Seth G. (February 11, 2016). "UBISOFT CONFIRMS NO ASSASSIN'S CREED THIS YEAR". IGN. Retrieved February 11, 2016.
Jump up ^ "The French getting Assassin's Creed comic". News.bigdownload.com. October 28, 2009. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed : Desmond C Trailer de la bande dessine". YouTube. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Ubisoft Says "Yes Russian" for New Assassin's Creed Comic Book | Ripten Video Game Blog". Ripten.com. July 15, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
Jump up ^ Tom Magrino (July 15, 2010). "Assassin's Creed comics due this fall". gamespot.com. Retrieved July 15, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Assassins's Creed: The Fall comic to be published by Wildstorm in November". News.bigdownload.com. August 17, 2010. Archived from the original on October 21, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
Jump up ^ Haas, Pete (May 26, 2012). "Assassin's Creed: The Chain Will Prepare You For Assassin's Creed 3". Retrieved June 6, 2012.
Jump up ^ George, Richard (July 19, 2013). "New Assassin's Creed Graphic Novel Debuts Indian Assassin". IGN. Retrieved July 19, 2013.
Jump up ^ Moser, Cassidee (August 31, 2015). "Assassin's Creed Comic Issue #1 Covers Revealed - IGN". Ca.ign.com. Retrieved December 24, 2015.
Jump up ^ Tony 'G-Man' Guerrero on August 31, 2015 (August 31, 2015). "ASSASSIN'S CREED #1 Covers Revealed". Comic Vine. Retrieved December 24, 2015.
Jump up ^ Osborn, Alex (August 28, 2015). "ASSASSIN'S CREED MOVIE FEATURES SHARED UNIVERSE WITH GAMES". IGN. Retrieved August 28, 2015.
Jump up ^ Tom Phillips (January 6, 2015). "Assassin's Creed film now due Christmas 2016". Eurogamer. Retrieved January 6, 2015.
Jump up ^ Graser, Marc (October 20, 2011). "Sony breeds 'Creed'". Variety. Retrieved August 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ Wigler, Josh (July 9, 2012). "Michael Fassbender To Star In Assassins Creed". MTV. Retrieved August 10, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b Doty, Meriah (August 27, 2015). "'Assassin's Creed' First Look: Here's Michael Fassbender as Brand New Character (Exclusive)". Yahoo. Retrieved August 27, 2015.
Jump up ^ Graser, Marc (October 22, 2012). "New Regency, Fox partner on Ubisofts Assassins Creed". Variety. Retrieved August 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ Siegel, Tatiana (January 14, 2013). "New Regency and Ubisoft Tap Brit Writer for 'Assassin's Creed' Film (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved August 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ Vejvoda, Jim (August 16, 2013). "Scott Frank Rewriting Assassin's Creed Movie". IGN. Retrieved August 16, 2013.
Jump up ^ Fleming Jr., Mike (April 7, 2014). "Exodus Scribes Adam Cooper & Bill Collage Take Assassins Creed". Deadline.com. Retrieved April 7, 2014.
Jump up ^ Fleming, Jr., Mike (April 29, 2014). "Michael Fassbender Poised To Re-Team With Macbeth Helmer On Assassins Creed". Deadline.com. Retrieved April 29, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Big screen adaptation of Assassin's Creed starts shooting in Malta". timesofmalta.com. September 3, 2015. Retrieved September 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ Lee, Chris (December 9, 2015). "Michael Fassbender was playing the hero in Assassin's Creed when he nabbed a SAG Award nomination". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 10, 2015.
Jump up ^ Jayson, Jay (January 15, 2016). "Assassin's Creed Movie Starring Michael Fassbender Wraps Filming". Comic Book.
Jump up ^ "Ubisoft preps animated Assassin's Creed short". Gamespot.com. November 12, 2010. Archived from the original on November 15, 2010. Retrieved November 13, 2010.
Jump up ^ chrislewis (July 25, 2011). "Assassin's Creed Embers, UbiWorkshop blog". Ubiworkshop.com. Retrieved September 13, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassins Creed Embers Debut Trailer [HD]". YouTube. Retrieved September 13, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Comic-con 2011 Panel: Assassin's Creed: The Creation of a Universe (PlayStation 3) C GameSpot Video". Gamespot.com. Retrieved September 13, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: The Secret Crusade". Retrieved May 31, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Revelations - Oliver Bowden - Penguin Books". Penguin.co.uk. November 24, 2011. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Artists for hire". Ubiworkshop.com. Archived from the original on August 22, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Your face-stabbing art could be featured in Assassin's Creed art book". GamesRadar.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed - Encyclopedia: Second Edition - UbiWorkshop". UbiWorkshop Store. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed - Encyclopedia-Third Edition". UbiWorkshop Store.
Jump up ^ Rositano, Joseph (September 22, 2009). "Academy of Champions Soccer Review". PALGN.
Jump up ^ Plunkett, Luke (October 21, 2011). "Yup, Ezio is in Soulcalibur V". Kotaku.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed? II Costume - LittleBigPlanet?". Littlebigplanet.com. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Uplay - Prince of Persia: The Forgotten Sands". Retrieved September 21, 2012.
Jump up ^ Marshall Honorof. "The Escapist : News : Assassin's Creed's Ezio Joins the Party in Final Fantasy XIII-2". Escapistmagazine.com. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ Sudhish Kamath (November 6, 2011). "Tale of three superheroes". The Hindu. Retrieved December 5, 2011.
Jump up ^ Ranjitha G (September 19, 2011). "Poster rip offs". The Times of India. Retrieved November 4, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Director's Cut Edition Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Alta?r's Chronicles Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Bloodlines Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed II Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed II Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed II Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed II: Discovery Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Revelations Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Revelations Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed: Revelations Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed III Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed III Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed III Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed III Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Liberation HD Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 27, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Liberation HD Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 27, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed III: Liberation Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 17, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Liberation HD Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 27, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Rogue Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Rogue Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Rogue Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Unity Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved November 12, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Unity Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved November 12, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Unity Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved November 12, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Syndicate Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved January 13, 2016.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Syndicate Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved January 13, 2016.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's Creed Syndicate Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved November 14, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Assassin's creed 3 Review". Blast. Retrieved November 11, 2012.
Jump up ^ Futter, Mike (April 21, 2014). "Assassins Creed Reaches 73 Million Copies Sold Across Franchise". Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved April 21, 2014.
External links
	Wikiquote has quotations related to: Assassin's Creed (video game series)
	Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Assassin's Creed Tour.
Official website
The Assassin's Creed Wiki
[show] v t e
Assassin's Creed
[show] v t e
Ubisoft
Categories: Assassin's Creed2012 in fictionAction-adventure gamesAlternate history video gamesAncient astronauts in fictionApocalyptic video gamesArtificial intelligence in fictionHistorical fictionOpen world video gamesPanhistorical video gamesParkour video gamesScience fiction video gamesStealth video gamesVideo game franchises introduced in 2007Virtual reality in fictionAssassinations in fictionVideo games with historical settingsMedia franchisesVideo games adapted into comicsVideo games adapted into novelsVideo games adapted into films
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch

Search
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikivoyage
Languages
???????
Az?rbaycanca
?????
Catal
?e?tina
?
Espa?ol
?????
Fran?ais
???
???????
Italiano
?????
???????
Nederlands
Z
Norsk bokm?l
Polski
Portugus
Roman?

Sloven?ina
 / srpski
Suomi
Svenska
???
Trk?e
?
Ti?ng Vi?t

Edit links
This page was last modified on 25 July 2016, at 18:57.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia? is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki